TILFELDIG GANG

Nr. 1, årgang 9
Mars 1992

Utgitt av Norsk Statistisk Forening

INNHOLD

Fra redaktøren

Fra formannen i Norsk Statistisk Forening. Trygve Nilsen
Utdanning

Statistics and probability topics for pre-college students:

The quantitative literacy perspective. James M. Landwehr
Statistics in the schools: Teaching the teachers. Richard L. Scheaffer
Faglige innlegg
Formålsløs inspeksjon? Jostein Lillestøl
Debatt-innlegg (fra Chance Magazine):
Monty Hall's probability puzzle. Eduardo Engel and Achilles Venetoulias.
Bokanmeldelser:

Erik Torgersen: Comparison of Statistical Experiments. Bo Lindqvist
Harald Martens and Tormod Næss: Multivariate Calibration. Erik Bølviken

Jon H. Knudsen: Innføring i Minitab. Henrik Dahl
Konferanser

14. Nordiske konferanse i matematisk statistikk. Røros 15.-19. juni 1992.

Program og bindende påmelding.
Industriell matematikk i 10 år ved NTH: Jubileumskonferanse 17.-21. august 1992
Kalender for internasjonale møter.
Meldinger

Scandinavian Journal of Staatistics. Nytt forlag og skjema for abonnenter
Nytt fra universiteter og høyskoler
Liste over medlemmer i Norsk Statistisk Forening

Annonse: Amanuensis i statistikk ved Agder distriktshøgskole
Medlemskap i Norsk Statistisk Forening
Bidrag til TG





Fra redaktøren

Vi er vel alle enige om at det er behov for statistikkundervisning i den videregående
skolen, spesielt i matematikk i studieretningen for allmenne fag. I dagens informasjonsog teknologisamfunn er det viktig å lære elevene kvantitative ferdigheter. I tillegg vil
dette styrke rekrutteringen til faget, noe som er viktig i seg selv med samfunnets akselererende behov for statistikere. Som nevnt av Grete U. Fenstad i forrige nummer av
TG foreligger det nå et forslag om statistikk og sannsynlighet i matematikkfaget. I den
forbindelsen kan det være av interesse å se hva som skjer i USA. Undervisningsutvalget i
NSF v/Jostein Lillestøl har tidligere i TG (nr. 4, 1989 og nr. 1, 1990) orientert om statistikkundervisning i den amerikanske skolen. Med støtte fra National Science Foundation
har The American Statistical Association (ASA), sammen med The National Council of
Teachers of mathematics, siden 1984 drevet et prosjekt kalt ”Quantitative Literacy Project (QLP)”. Det er blitt utarbeidet undervisnings-materiale og gitt etterutdanningskurs
for lærere. I dette nummer av TG presenteres to artikler fra foredrag gitt ved årsmøtet
i ASA i fjor som gir en orientering om dette prosjektet. Det neste skrittet i QLP er
å integrere statistikkundervisningen i matematikkfaget ved å gjøre matematikken mer
dataorientert. Dette bør jo også være av interesse for matematikk i den norsk skolen.
I denne forbindelsen kan det nevnes at i staten Wisconsin er det et krav at alle elever
i ”high school” skal ha instruksjon i elementær statistikk, og i California gis statistikkundervisning på alle nivå fra ”kindergarten”, dvs. fra 5 års alderen!
Ellers i dette nummer er det en oppfølging av debatten fra USA når det gjelder valg av
spillstrategi. Artikkelen er fra Chance og gir en lettfattelig forklaring på hvorfor Marilyn
vos Savant hadde rett.

Vedlagt til dette TG skal det være en postgiroblankett for innbetaling av medlemskontingent til Norsk Statistisk Forening. Jeg vil oppfordre alle lesere til å sende inn giroen
nå. Kontingenten er så lav at det ellers er lett å glemme at man ikke har betalt, og denne
inntekten er viktig for driften av foreningen.

Dette nummeret inkluderer en liste over medlemmer i NSF. Hvis det er interesse for det så
kan det bli aktuelt å oppdatere denne listen med telefonnummer, arbeidssted og eventuell
e-mail adresse. Jeg vil gjerne ha reaksjoner på en slik oppdatering. Den enkleste måten
å oppnå dette på er isåfall at alle medlemmene sender inn denne informasjonen til meg,
gjerne over e-mail.

Jan F. Bjørnstad



Fra formannen i Norsk Statistisk Forening
Norsk Statistisk Forening har for tiden 210 ordinære og 30 student medlemmer. En liste over dem er tatt inn i dette nummer av TG. Vi tror at det kan
være interessant å se hvor ens fagkolleger befinner seg.

Kontingentinntekten for 1991 var kr 24.000 . Denne skal dekke utsendelse
av TG med kr. 9.000 (fra 1993 muligens også trykkingen) og bidrag til
lokalforeningene i Bergen, Oslo og Trondheim. Bidraget har hittil vært kr.
9.000. Dette gir et disponibelt beløp på kr. 6.000, som skal dekke medlemskapi ISI, mulige underskudd på etterutdanningsseminar og konferanser mm.
Det er etter min mening for lite. Men siden foreningen ønsker å samle alle
norske statistikere, bør kontingenten være så lav at ingen velger å stå utenfor på grunn av den. Jeg har derfor liten lyst til å foreslå at kontingenten
heves. Jeg ser heller at vi alle søker i våre omgivelser etter flere potensielle
medlemmer, og i fall de finnes, anmoder dem å melde seg inn.

I det forrige nummer uttrykte jeg glede over at arbeidsmarkedet for statistikere fremdeles er godt. Det ser spesielt ut til å gjelde for undervisningsstillinger ved distriktshøgskoler og andre høgskoler dersom vi skal se på antall
forespørsler som vi får fra slike institusjoner om potensielle søkere til stillinger. I et annet innlegg refererte Grete Fenstad fra forslag til fagplan for
den videregående skole. Hun fortalte at sannsynlighetsregning og statistikk
er foreslått tatt inn på de fleste nivåer. Dette er et moment som vil øke
etterspørselen etter hovedfagsstatistikere som matematikklektorer i skolen.
Hvordan står det så til med arbeidsmulighetene innefor praktiseringen av
faget vårt? Er det slik at vi bare utdanner for å kunne utdanne enda flere,
eller er det også behov for våre kandidater i det praktiske liv?
I forbindelse med redigeringen av medlemslisten har jeg med interesse
studert de adresser som de ulike medlemmer gir. De viser en hyggelig spredning på ulike arbeidsgivere. Det som listen ikke sier noe om, er hvorvidt dette
stort sett skyldes at næringslivet er representert ved kandidater fra NTH,
mens kandidater fra universitetene holder seg til de offentlige og halvoffentlige
arbeidsgiverne. I så fall ville det være en uheldig deling av arbeidsmarkedet.
Jeg har inntrykk av at en stor del av dem som blir ansatt i offentlige still-

inger begynner som konsulenter og forblir det. På noen måter er det nokså
naturlig at statistikerne er konsulenter siden de representerer et metodefag.
Men jeg er ikke like sikker på at det er riktig at så mange ender i det
lønnsjiktet.

Trygve Nilsen



Det amerikanske " Quantitative Literacy Project" har som formål å styrke statistikk- og matematikk-

undervisingen i skolen , blant annet ved å motivere forskjellige matematikkemner ved bruk av dataanalyse slik

at statistikk blir integrert i matematikkfaget. Vi presenterer her to artikler som beskriver dette prosjektet.

Artiklene blir publiserti " 1991 Proceedings of the American Statistical Association Section on Statistical
Education" og er her gjengitt med tillatelse av forfatterne. Forklaring på noen av forkortelsene som benyttes:
ASA : The American Statistical Association . CSE: Center for Statistical Education (under ASA).
K-12 : Kindergarten til og med high school. NCTM : The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics

STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY TOPICS FOR PRE-COLLEGE STUDENTS:
THE QUANTITATIVE LITERACY PERSPECTIVE
James M. Landwehr, AT&T Bell Laboratories
Murray Hill, NJ 07974

A philosophy of teaching statistics in junior

Abstract

The Quantitative Literacy Project has
developed and published four curriculum units
dealing with basic topics in data analysis,
probability, simulation, and an introduction to
statistical inference through survey sampling.
For basic statistics, the approach followed in
these units uses real data of interest to students
for
methods
graphical
emphasizes
and
interpreting data. Simulation of real events

introduces the basic ideas of probability and
solves more complicated probability problems.
A simulation approach is also used to develop

confidence intervals and introduce statistical
inference. This paper discusses reasons for
emphasizing these ideas and describes some
examples that are in the materials.

Philosophy and General Approach
The goal of the Quantitative Literacy Project
(QL) is to introduce the most important and upto-date topics in statistics and probability into

the elementary and secondary school curricula.
We chose to focus on roughly the middle 75% of
the student population for grades approximately
7 through 12. Thus, our goal was not to produce
materials usable only by special groups, such as
the most advanced students or students needing
remediation.

Taken together, the four books (references
[1], [2], [3] and [4]) provide an introduction to

the ideas of statistics and probability that
students should possess upon their graduation

from high school. The QL books use many
examples to help teach students how to deal with
the types of data and questions that they will

‘frequently meet in the media, at work, and as

informed citizens.

The emphasis is not on

watering down advanced mathematical statistics

and probability for younger students, but rather
on experiencing real examples and hands-on
applications.

and

senior

high

schools

emerged

through

interaction, mutual education, and negotiation

among the statisticians and mathematics teachers
on

the

American

Statistical

Association

-

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics

Joint Committee. The four QL books are thus a
result of a collaboration between statisticians

and teachers, who have agreed on both the
Statistical concepts that are most important for
the general public to know and the best ways to
teach these concepts. This collaboration included
not only the authors of the four units, but also
other teachers and statisticians who provided
valuable insights during the writing and field

testing.

The

principles

that

guided

this

collaboration include the following:

1. There is often more than one way to approach

problems

in

probability

statistics

problem

and

can

probability.

be

solved

A

either

theoretically or by simulation. It is not unusual

for two statisticians to make two different graphs
to display the same data.
discussion

and

This means that

evaluation

of

different

approaches can take up a large part of class time.

It also means that the data may suggest more
than

one

conclusion.

Students

must

be

encouraged to attack problems from different
angles

and

be

prepared

to

support

their

conclusions.

2. Real data that are interesting and important to

the students should be used in statistics lessons.
Real data give the study of statistics both its
legitimacy and its excitement. In addition, real
data are

invariably

messy.

Values are often

missing and are sometimes faulty. Students, who
are accustomed to the neatness of the numbers in

much

of

mathematics,

need

experience

in

dealing with nuinbers in the real world.

3.

Traditional

topics

taught

in

introductory

statistics — such as the standard deviation, the



normal distribution, hypothesis testing, and
Bayes' Theorem and other probability formulas
— should be taught after the more basic ideas of
probability,
experimental
analysis,
data
simulation, and information about sample
surveys that are in the four QL books.

4. The emphasis in teaching statistics should be
on good examples and on building intuition, not
on showing how to lie with statistics or on

probability paradoxes that destroy a student's
confidence.

5. Students enjoy and profit from project work,
experiments, and other activities designed to
give them practical experience in statistics.

6. Students

should

write

sentences

and

The emphasis should be on interpreting plots

and numerical summaries rather than on the
technicalities of constructing plots and statistics.
7. Finally, all statistics and probability taught in
the schools should be important and useful to
students in their own right and not serve just as

preparation for college courses.

This emphasis on data analysis first rather

than theoretical probability and __ statistical
inference results from the following general,
simplified model of how good statistics is often
done in practice. Our approach is to teach
statistics through many examples that follow this
model. When confronted with a problem, the
statistician first considers questions about the
data and the substantive problem. For example,
how were the data collected, are they the right
data for questions of interest, how were the
numbers actually measured, what are the reasons
for any missing values, and so forth. If the data
are of good quality and relevant enough to some
important issues to be worth analyzing, the first

thing to do is to make a variety of simple
graphical and numerical summaries of the data.
This begins the iterative process of interpreting
the plots and possibly asking further questions
and replotting. Sometimes the results at this
stage give clear and convincing answers to the
questions,

so

further

models can be either stochastic or deterministic.
Finally, statistical inference about the parameters

in one or several models can be useful.
Our approach emphasizes the first two of

these four stages, namely data questioning and
data analysis.
Simple linear models are
developed for several data examples, but
statistical models are not introduced to any great
extent. Statistical inference arises only in the
fourth book in the context of inference about the
population

proportion

for

a

dichotomous

population.

paragraphs giving their conclusions. The answer
to a Statistics problem is generally not a number
but a paragraph summarizing the interpretation.

important

find an

to try to

needed and it is useful

appropriate model (or models) for the data; the

more

needed.
not
is
analysis
sophisticated
Sometimes, however, further analyses are

Why

should

statistics

in

the

schools

be

taught concentrating on the beginning stages of

the full analysis process?

Not only is this

approach easy, fun and wide open to creativity,
it models the way good scientific and statistical
work is begun. Someone has a question, so we
collect some data and see if we can explore some
possible answers.

Most of what a high school

graduate should know about data collection,

summarization and interpretation can be taught
through

this

approach,

unencumbered

by

a

plethora of mysterious assumptions. Moreover,
the process of data analysis is not trivial, it is not
something that people know how to do innately

or just pick up. It does need to be taught!
Our approach implies that

some of the

traditional introductory terms and topics do not

arise

naturally,

included in the
include

the

and

therefore

they

four QL books.

following:

standard

are

not

Examples
deviation,

normal distribution, least squares fit, t-test, chi-

squared

test,

type

I

and

II

errors,

Bayes

Theorem, and permutation and combinations.
We have, however, included the more basic

ideas and methods that are related to some of
these terms, as is illustrated in the following
paragraph.

Instead of having

students

calculate

the

standard deviation, we emphasize plotting data
distributions in various ways so as to give a
visual impression about the variability in the

data. For numerical measures of variability we
use the range and interquartile range, which the
students

can

easily

understand

and

explain,

rather than the standard deviation. The normal



distribution is not included because the technical
level at which it would be natural to introduce
the normal distribution is not reached.
Specifically, the probability material does not
develop the central limit theorem; moreover,
formal models of data distributions or residuals
through which the normal distribution might
also be introduced, are not used. However,

students get much experience examining and
comparing data distributions for characteristics
such as symmetry, length of tails, and possible
gaps or outliers. Rather than fit a straight line to
data with the method of least squares, we use a
method based on medians that can be
constructed graphically. This method is resistant
to outliers, so it is often more useful than least
squares for real data. Neither the formal

terminology

of hypothesis

testing

nor

any

specific test statistic is covered; instead, students
get experience interpreting and comparing data
sets mainly through using plots. The ideas of
confidence intervals are introduced and used
only in the simplest possible inference problem,
namely that of learning about the proportion ina
dichotomous population from a random sample.
The QL_ probability material emphasizes
estimating probabilities from real data and
simulating random events, rather than a more
formal approach that would make a prion

statements about equally likely outcomes and
present formulas and counting methods for
The subject of
computing probabilities.
permutations and combinations is treated
adequately in many school mathematics books,

so we did not attempt to rewrite it in the QL
materials.

Summary of Content
Topics that members of the Joint Committee
judged to be the most important were organized
into four small books rather than one large text.
Our strategy was to package the topics in a way

that we hoped would have the most impact in
the schools, and supplementary materials that
could be taught within the existing mathematics
curriculum in a variety of ways seemed like they
would be used more than material prepared as a
One semester course. The books can be used
flexibly with different types of students in grades

7 through 12. The minimum amount of time
needed to cover any single book is about three

weeks, but much more time. can be spent
depending on the level of the students and the
number and size of projects that the teacher
assigns. Taken together, the four books can be
used as the basis for a one semester course in
statistics and probability in grades 10 to 12,
although most teachers would also bring in some
additional mathematical probability from a
traditional text.

The books all follow the same basic style.
For each topic there is first some brief
for
questions
and
material
explanatory
discussion which the teacher can present to the
class or have the students read themselves. This
material is followed by applications (exercises)
that the students can work individually, in small
groups, or in the whole class.

The first book in the QL series, Exploring
Data [1], emphasizes graphical methods and
serves as an introduction to data analysis. Data
sets that are included concern topics such as the
nutrition in fast foods, sales of the most popular
children's books, safety indices for different
automobiles, television ratings, baseball home
run records, SAT scores by state, life expectancy
values, and many others. Examples were
selected to be interesting or important to
students and represent the kinds of issues that

citizens must deal with. The interdisciplinary
nature of statistics allows illustrations from
many areas of science and everyday activities.
The statistical analyses concentrate on

constructing and
graphical

interpreting certain simple

displays.

This

book

treats

three

single-variable plots: line plots (plotting the data
on a number line, perhaps identifying different
observations with different characters); stemand-leaf plots; and box plots. Traditional graphs
such as bar graphs and pie charts are not

included. Numerical summaries used are the
median, maximum and minimum, quartiles,
inter-quartile range, and mean. Scatter plots of
two variables are interpreted in terms of features
such as general linear or nonlinear trends,
outliers, clusters, and gaps. Robust methods that

are based on medians and can be calculated
graphically are presented for fitting a straight



line to a scatter plot and for smoothing time
series plots. Only a few statistical techniques

are introduced; what is important is not the

specific techniques, but how they are used.

The general style of Exploring Data is to

show through examples how good data analysis
is done. The authors searched for examples with
interesting features and wrote a series of
questions for each example that take the student
through the data analysis, breaking it down into
specific, small, learnable steps. The goal is that
students, after working through many such
examples and answering the questions, will
develop competence and confidence in their
ability to analyze new data sets on their own. In
summary, students learn how to examine plots in
order to describe the data, how to detect patterns
in the data and make conjectures about them,
and how to select the appropriate plots for a

Independent

events

several examples.

are

discussed

through

Tree diagrams are used to

present outcomes of compound events and to
conditional
notions of
basic
introduce
probability. Students learn how to find and use
expected values and when to multiply and add
Random numbers are also
probabilities.
introduced and used in sampling. Several
examples involve tables of real data, so that
students gain experience in constructing

probabilities from the appropriate ratios. This
book differs from most junior or senior high

school introductions to probability in that it
emphasizes estimation of probabilities from real

data and the use of expected values in decision
making.

QL book, Exploring Probability [2], does not
require Exploring Data as a prerequisite and
either one could be taught first depending on
local preferences. Both are intended for grades

The Art and Techniques of Simulation [3]
develops the ideas of empirical probability by
least
at
solve,
to
simulation
using
probability
difficult
more
approximately,
problems that could not be solved theoretically
at this level. Students develop the idea of
formulating a mathematical, probabilistic model
that corresponds to a stated real problem. The
simulations begin with physical devices and
proceed to using random number tables and the
computer. The development emphasizes the use
of an eight-step process (developed from trialand-error with students and teachers) for
simulating a given problem. The eight steps are
the following: state the problem clearly; define
the key components; state the underlying
assumptions; select a model to generate the
outcomes for a key component; define and
conduct a trial; record the observations of
interest; repeat the previous two steps for at least
50 trials; summarize the information and draw

about 7 through 10.

conclusions.

given set of data.

Exploring Data is called the first book in the
QL series to emphasize the point of view that, in
order to interpret data, you do not need to teach
probability first. That is, we believe that the
process of displaying data and interpreting the
results can be useful even without any formal
distinction between population and sample, and
whether or not some random mechanism was
used to sample the data. The data in many of the
examples in the book, such as the traffic fatality
rates in all 50 states, cannot be thought of as a
population;
any
from
sample
random
nevertheless, data analysis is useful. The next

Exploring Probability develops the basic
concepts of probability from an empirical point

of

view

that

experimentation.

emphasizes

Student

These experiments involve

simple spinners, dice, coins, and cards. Students
are given enough experience through such work
to develop intuitive notions of what randomness
means. They learn the relative frequency

concept of probability, how to estimate
probabilities from real data, and the relationship
between estimated and theoretical probability.

Example problems include estimating the
probability of guessing five or more correct
answers in a seven question multiple-choice test,
simulating the spread of an infectious disease,

and studying the time spent in a maze. A major

strength of this unit is that it encourages
analytical reasoning, since setting up a
simulation requires a student to analyze
processes and set up a logical sequence of steps
to predict possible outcomes. It also provides a
natural

opportunity for integrating computer



applications into a mathematics curriculum,

although it does not require the use of
Simulation

computers.

is

an

important

technique of current applied mathematics that

can be made accessible to students and used to
solve interesting problems, so it deserves a place
in the curriculum. This book should follow the
material in Exploring Probability and is

The approach taken in this book to
constructing confidence intervals is unlike other

introductory treatments to statistical inference in
that it relies on simulations from many different
populations and then a logical argument for
constructing the confidence interval, rather than
on algebraic formulas. The statistical ideas are
also carried over to two related problems, one

intended for grades 8 through 12.
Exploring Surveys and Information from

involving capture-recapture and the other
constructing and comparing different estimators
of the maximum for uniform observations over

underlying sample surveys and gives students
enough information so that they can make
informed opinions about the widespread use of
polls and other surveys. It contains more
advanced material than the other three QL books
and is intended for grades 10 through 12. While
the real-world context is a survey, the

an unknown interval. A valuable practical
component of this unit involves projects in
which students design, execute, and analyze a
survey for some question of interest to them.

unknown population proportion on the basis of a
random sample. Simulation is used to develop
the concept of sampling distribution, and there
are no complicated formulas. By simulating to
obtain the sampling distribution of the sample
proportion for several populations with different
true proportions, and by comparing the sampling
distributions using box plots, students are able to
construct a confidence interval for the population
proportion based on the sample proportion. The

Publications, 1986.

Samples

[4]

teaches

the

statistical

ideas

dichotomous
a
is
context
mathematical
population where we want to learn about the

major statistical goal is to enable students to
understand the fundamental ideas underlying

Practical aspects of
confidence intervals.
of bias are also
sources
sampling and possible
discussed through many examples. Thus, this
book deals with the basics of statistical inference
in the context of random sampling from the
simplest type of theoretical population, namely
one having only two types of members.

References

[1] Landwehr, James M. and Ann E. Watkins,
Exploring Data, Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour

[2] Newman, Clare M., Thomas E. Obremski

and Richard L. Scheaffer, Exploring Probability,
Palo Alto, CA:

Dale Seymour Publications,

1987.

[3] Gnanadesikan, Mrudulla,
Richard L.
Scheaffer and Jim Swift, The Art and
Techniques of Simulation, Palo Alto, CA: Dale
Seymour Publications, 1987.

[4] Landwehr, James M., Jim Swift and Ann E.
Watkins, Exploring Surveys and Information

from Samples, Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour
Publications, 1987.



STATISTICS IN THE SCHOOLS: TEACHING THE TEACHERS
Richard L. Scheaffer
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL

Key Words: teachers, mathematics education
BUILDING TIIE DELIVERY SYSTEM

Those who would teach mathematics need

Statistical education in the schools can be
likened to the task of bringing a new product
to consumers. The research and development
phase has largely been accomplished through
the two NSF grants that produced the
Quantitative Literacy (QL) materials and
model workshops and through the work of the

appropriate to the grades they will teach,
in a style consistent with the way in
which they are expected to teach. It is
time that we identify a cadre of
in
interests
special
with
teachers
be
will
who
science
and
tics
mathema
prepared to teach young children both

the
that developed
committees
NCTM
EVALUATION
AND
CURRICULUM
STANDARDS. This work has generated an
awareness that certain statistical concepts can

and should be taught as part of the K-12
mathematics curriculum; it has, in fact,
whetted the appetite of many to hastily get on
with the business of teaching statistics. One
would do well to remember, however, that a
new product cannot be brought to market
without a delivery system. A good delivery
system must be strong enough to carry the
product, must have regular opportunities for
being renewed, refreshed and updated, and
must be attuned to signposts along the way to
For the product under
stay on course.
education, the
statistical
consideration,
These teachers
delivery system is teachers.
must be provided with strong minds and arms
for carrying the load, opportunities to rest and
share the load with others, and affirmation
that the load is being carried in the right
direction.

CONTENT AND STYLE: TWO ARMS FOR
CARRYING TIE LOAD

Of the many attempts during the 1980’s
for change in
to articulate the need
of the most
one
mathematics education,
the National
from
successful was the report
EVERYBODY
entitled
Research Council
Commenting on the needs of
COUNTS.
teachers, this document states:

to learn contemporary mathematics

mathematics and science in an

integrated, discovery-based environment.

The QL Project has taken it upon itself to
look at both content issues and style of
teaching. As stated in the QL WORKSHOP
MANUAL, the goals of such a workshop are
twofold:

1.

To teach statistical techniques, and

2.

To provide pedagogical experiences that

will prepare the participants to teach
these statistical and probabilistic concepts
accurately and effectively in the

classroom.

Content

The specific content of the QL Project has
been discussed and reviewed on a number of
occasions and in numerous documents. At this
point, it is sufficient to say that the content in

statistics is exploratory, empirical, largely
graphical, and modern in the sense that it
parallels the way an applied statistician would
address a real problem and uses many of the
Again, the CURRICULUM
same tools.
STANDARDS has picked up this theme in its
statement:

Collecting,

organizing,

describing,

and

interpreting data , as well as making

decisions and predictions on the basis of
that information are important in a

society

based

on

technology

communication. These processes are

and



young
for
appropriate
particularly
solve
to
used
children because they can be
g,
interestin
y
problems that are inherentl

represent significant applications

of mathematics to practical questions and
offer rich opportunities for
mathematical inquiry.

The content theme of data analysis is not
just in the statistics standard but runs
throughout many standards, such as those in
number sense, measurement, algebra, geometry
and functions. The content in statistics should
be connected to other content areas of

mathematics

for

and

motivation

enlightenment. To quote the CURRICULUM
STANDARDS once more:

This standard should not be viewed as
advocating, or even prescribing, a

statistics course; rather, it describes topics
that should be integrated with
mathematics topics and disciplines.

other

Problem solving as a means as well as a

goal of instruction

The use of a variety of instructional
formats

The use of calculators and computers as
tools for learning and doing
mathematics

Effective questioning techniques

Student communication of mathematical
ideas orally and in writing

The assessment of learning as an integral
part of instruction

In parallel, these STANDARDSalso call

for decreased attention to:

Teacher and text as exclusive sources of
knowledge

Rote

Style

memorization

of

facts

and

procedures

As suggested above in content, the style
of the QL materials and models is one that
emphasizes problem solving. This approach is
used throughout the GUIDELINES FOR THE
TEACHING OF STATISTICS, K-12, recently
published by ASA’s Center for Statistical
Education, as each section is developed around
a five-step model of understanding the
problem, gathering data, organizing and
representing data, describing patterns in data,
and interpreting data in light of the original
problem-solving
this
Within
problem.
framework, the QLP also emphasizes hands-on
work with manipulatives and data, discussion
and logical argument, cooperative learning, and

student projects (individual and/or group).

The QL emphases are consistent with the
CURRICULUM STANDARDS in which the
teacher is viewed as a moderator, facilitator,

the
than
rather
coach
and
catalyst
authoritative director of everything that takes
place in the classroom. The CURRICULUM
STANDARDS call for increased attention to:
The active involvement of students in
constructing and applying mathematical
ideas

Extended periods of individual seatwork

practicing routine tasks

Instruction by teacher exposition

Paper-and-pencil manipulative skill work

The relegation of testing to an adjunct
role with the sole purpose of

assigning grades

These pedagogical issues are expanded
released
NCTM's , recently
iin
upon
FOR
DS
STANDAR
PROFESSIONAL

TEACHING

MATIIEMATICS,

which

STATISTICIANS,

AND

preserves the flavor of data analysis throughout
the curriculum and lists statistics and
probability as core subjects to which all
mathematics teachers, K-12, need adequate

exposure.

TEACHERS,

OPPORTUNITIES
ADMINISTRATORS:
FOR SHARING TIE LOAD
Even with a strong content background in



10

modern statistics and experience with the
teaching style outlined above, a lone teacher
may find it impossible to deliver the statistical

education package called for by NCTM and the *
QLP without.a local support network. Thus,
the QL model workshop format has built in
requirements that:

Workshops involve a group of tcachers
from the same geographic region
Workshops encourage teachers to deliver
similar workshops in their home
region

enlist
Workshops’
administrators and

support
the
request them

of
to

component is of major importance to most
teachers.

COUNTS
EVERYBODY
report
The
in its
administrators
of
role
key
the
recognized
administrators
statement that school-based
:

should:

attend

an information session on QL

Workshops involve local
interested in education

support of the local administrator. For this
reason, administrators must agree in writing to
support the teacher before that teacher is
accepted for a QL workshop. In addition, the
administrator is invited to attend a session of
the workshop devoted to explaining the
principles of the QLP and its ties to other
reforms in mathematics education. One of the
crilicisins of past QL workshops has been that
the administrator component was handled too
informally and emphasized too little; this

Provide opportunities for teachers to work
statisticians

together

Become

educated

Teachers

mathematics education

It is important that each teacher who is
attempting to launch out onto the path
suggested by the QLP and the CURRICULUM

Support innovation

STANDARDS develop a collegial relationship

with a group of like-minded teachers. This not
only provides moral support for the new
venture, but also allows the sharing of ideas
and classroom activities.
(Finding data
analysis activities that work well in the

classroom is no small task; this sharing can be
a real time-saver.) Such a supportive group of

teachers would ideally develop along two
First, the teachers attending a QL
tracks.
workshop should all be within close proximity

Second, each teacher who
to one another.
completes a QL workshop should use that
model to conduct other workshops in his or her
home school or district. With that approach, a
sizable cadre of teachers well-versed in
statistical education could be built up over a
relatively short period of time.
Administrators

Confronted with myriad textbooks, state
guidelines, district goals and standardized tests,
all of which may affect the teacher’s annual
evaluation, today’s classroom teacher has little
room for innovation without the expressed

on

issues

in

Statisticians

Prior to attending a QL workshop, most
teachers would have had little formal training
in statistics and virtually no training in the
techniques that the QLP says should be used in
It goes almost
the mathematics classroom.
summer
one-week
a
without saying that

workshop is not going to supply the teacher
with everything that teacher will need to know
to teach statistics throughout his or her career.
Thus, the support of a network of local
statisticians is critical to the ongoing teaching
of statistics within any school or district. The
mechanism for beginning this network is
embedded in the QL workshop model, as
statisticians are invited to attend the workshop
for a few hours to become acquainted with the
teachers, to offer suggestions on what is
happening in the workshop, and to bring to the
teachers some examples from the ”real” world.
Another duty that these statisticians often
perform is that of hosting follow-up sessions as

field trips during the school year. These field

trips give the teachers first-hand experience
with applications of mathematics and often

lead to other interactions between the school



11

FOR

problem, collect and analyze data, use simple
tools, work as a team, learn by doing, convey
the message clearly) that closely parallels the
QL approach. SPC teams in many industries

How do we know we are on the right road? A
partial answer comes from internal checks
among the teachers and students who have

similar to the one suggested above (in the
section on Style). To go back to the notion of
field trips, on such trips it is not uncommon for
a teacher to notice the similarity between the

community and the business community or the
college/university community.

AFFIRMATIONS:

SIGNPOSTS

GUIDING TIE LOAD

been part of the QL Project and its
ramifications. Virtually all of the teachers who
have participated in a QL workshop think of it
as a worthwhile experience that extended their

knowledge and gave them something useful to
take back to the classroom. Typical quotes are

use a problem solving format that is quite

two approaches to using mathematics. Added
to the positive support of the teachers, the
industrial success with SPC seems to lead to an

inescapable conclusion about this approach to
statistics and to mathematics education. IT
WORKS!

as follows:

EPILOGUE

“The QL materials successfully illustrate
to students the relevancy of
mathematics.”

“Interesting, informative, fun!”
“QL workshops have helped me develop
as a teacher more than any other
workshop I’ve attended.”

“Quantitative ‘literacy is a must for an
informed society.”

“The statisticians were terrific to work
with. It was good to have the
opportunity.”

A plan is now in place for developing a
strong delivery system. Is that the end of the
road? Hardly! Many of those teachers who
leave the QL workshops excited about
something new and different that seems
meaningful also leave with an important
question unanswered. ”How can I work this
material into a curriculum that is already
Unfortunately, many have
overcrowded?”
decided the the answer is ”I can’t.” With this
question in mind, the CSE has developed a new
project under the title A DATA-DRIVEN
SCHOOL
HIGH
FOR
CURRICULUM
to
attempt
will
that
MATHEMATICS
can
topics
illustrate how and where statistical
be placed within the mathematics topics that

STANDARDS is further evidence that, at least
among mathematics educators, this approach

are emphasized in the STANDARDS. The idea
is to use data analysis to motivate and
illustrate the important topics in mathematics
while, at the same tirne, providing a coherent

But, what about the opinions of those
outside -the QLP and the mathematics
education community that it impinges upou?
One interesting observation is that the
development of the QLP occurred in rouglily
the same time frame as the renewed emphasis
upon statistical process control (SPC) in
If one examines the outcomes of
industry.

Since most of the participants at QL
workshops are secondary teachers, a second
“Why doesn’t this
question often arises.
material begin in the elementary grades?” To
begin the process of translating some QL ideas
to the earlier grades, the CSE has also
entitled
project
a
on
embarked
THE
IN
Y
LITERAC
QUANTITATIVE
TICS
MATIIEMA
ELEMENTARY
CURRICULUM. The emphasis here will be on

The fact
embedded in

that the QI. concepts were
the NCTM CURRICULUM

Similarly, the QL
seems to be correct.
approach is in line with the suggestions made
in EVERYBODY COUNTS.

these independent efforts, one can see that they
have evolved into rather similar programs.
a
developed
has
movement
SPC
The

philosophy of problem solving (identify the real

picture of elementary statistics.

the enhancement of the skills of the teachers so
that - they can effectively introduce some
statistical ideas in mathematics and science.



12

So, the road is long but the directions

seem clear and

the pool

of supporters is

growing larger. With continued diligence by so
many, the delivery system will eventually be
able to deliver a quality product in statistical
education.

REFERENCES

Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for
School Mathematics, National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics, Reston, VA, 1989.
Everybody Counts, National Research Council,
Washington, DC, 1989.

Guidelines for the Teaching of Statistics,
Center for Statistical Education, American
Statistical Association, Alexandria, VA 1991.

Professional

Standards

for

Teaching

Mathematics, National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, Reston, VA, 1991.

Manual,
Literacy Workshop
Quantitative
Center for Statistical Education, American
Statistical Association, Alexandria, VA, 1991.



13

Formålsløs inspeksjon?
Jostein Lillestøl

La oss ta for oss situasjoner der tradisjonell stikkpøveinspeksjon kan
tenkes brukt, men der prosessforståelse, statistisk innsikt og kvalitetsideologi
kan få en på andre tanker (idéene stammer i hovedsak fra Shewhart, Deming
og Mood).

Vi betrakter ensartede objekter (varer, tjenester, registreringer) som går
fra leverandør til kunde i en prosess, og der det kan være behov for å utøve
en kontroll- eller inspeksjonsfunksjon. Det kan være

- innkomne vareenheter fra ekstern leverandør

- leverte produksjonsenheter fra et trinn i produksjonsprosess til det
neste

- utført arbeid i et oppdrag (f.eks. en mengde sveisepunkter)
- utført arbeid i et tjenesteytende system

- registeringer av aktivitet (innkjøpsordrer, fakturaer etc.)
Vi kan tenke flere ulike situasjoner:

e objektene kommer som et enkeltstående parti,
e objektene kommer
i partier, flere over tid,

e objektene kommer i en kontinuerlig strøm,

e objektene kommer kontinuerlig, men blir av praktiske grunner organisert i partier.

En må i denne sammenheng tenke over om kontrollfunksjonen er rettet mot
den underliggende prosess, eller bare det foreliggende parti. Dette vil være

bestemmende for hvordan eventuelle beslutningsregler knyttet til kontrolleller inspeksjonsfunksjonen utformes.



14

La oss tenke oss at kontrollfunksjonen er rettet mot en bestemt type feil
ved objektene. La oss betrakte inspeksjonsplaner knyttet til partier. Disse
er av to slag:
e aksept /forkast planer
e korrigerende planer

Aksept /forkast planer innebærer at det trekkes en stikkprøve fra partiet,

og hvis det finnes få/mange feil i dette aksepteres /forkastes hele partiet.
Korrigerende planer innebærer at når mange feil finnes i stikkprøven, uføres
en helt eller delvis inspeksjon av de øvrige.

Selv om inspeksjonsplaner er

viet stor oppmerksomhet i lærebøker, og omfattende tabeller er tilgjengelig,
er det ikke tvil om at det foregår mye uvettig bruk.
Valg av inspeksjonsplan, ja om inspeksjon overhodet bør finne sted, bør
være basert på kunnskap om den prosessen som genererer partiene. Vi skal

nedenfor se at delvis inspeksjon av partier fra såkalte stabile prosesser har
lite for seg. Dette har vidtrekkende konsekvenser i diskusjonen av egnede
kontrollaktiviteter.

Inspeksjon av partier fra stabil prosess
La oss si vi er interessert i en viss type feil ved enheter som kommer i en

kontinuerlig strøm, men som av ulike grunner blir samlet i partier. Det kan
dreie seg om alt fra

- innkomne materialer fra fast ekstern eller intern leverandør, til

- registeringer av aktivitet (ordresedler, faktura, bilag etc.)
Antall enheter i hvert parti kan være fast eller variere tilfeldig fra parti til
parti, det siste vil f.eks. være aktuelt hvis vi betrakter fakturaer som samles
på månedsbasis.

Anta at stikkprøver tas fra hvert parti med sikte på aksept eller ikke av

de ukontrollerte for dette partiet. Studer et gitt parti, og la
N

=

Antall enheter i partiet

M

=

"Antall enheter med feil blant de N



15

La videre

n

=

Stikkprøvestørrelsen

Y

=

Antall enheter med feil i stikkprøven

X

=

"Antall gjenværende enheter med feil i partiet

La oss anta at prosessen som genererer feil i de innkomne enheter er sta-

bil, dvs. at det er en konstant sannsynlighet p for at den aktuelle feiltype
forekommer på en enhet, og at forekomst av feil er uavhengig fra enhet til
enhet. Da kan det vises matematisk at
X er statistisk uavhengig av Y

dvs. at kunnskap om Y er verdiløs ved prediksjon av X. Dette medfører
at beslutningsregler av typen aksept /forkast /gjennomgå resten av partiet er
verdiløse. ! Det er derfor bare i situasjoner der prosessen som genererer feil
i innkomne enheter er ustabil, at denne type inspeksjon kan ha noe for seg.
Dette kan skje ved at
e feilsannsynligheten varierer over tid

e avhengighet i forekomst av feil fra enhet til enhet

e andre forekomster av feil av spesielle årsaker,

dvs. som ikke er del av systemet slik det normalt virker

Likevel er det et spørsmål om kostnadseffektiviteten av slike inspeksjonsplaner.

I daglig drift er ustabile systemer et lite ønskelig utgangspunkt. Blant
grunnene nevner vi:

- virkemåten er vanskelig forståelig, og ikke predikerbar,

- konsekvensen av endringer i systemet lar seg vanskelig vurdere.
En vil derfor ha fordel av å studere alle viktige prosesser mht. deres stabilitet, og hvis de er ustabile, forsøke å finne årsakene, og fjerne disse. Dette
er et sentralt element i kvalitetsledelse (Deming). Merk at hvis en prosess
blir stabilisert gjennom slikt arbeid, vil en inspeksjonsplan som ga mening

under mer kaotiske forhold, ikke lenger være særlig meningsfylt.
1Dette betyr ikke at stikkprøven er uten verdi for å anslå feilsannsynligheten.
Stikkprøven på n enheter fra partiet er i denne forbindelse likeverdig med n enheter
hentet tilfeldig fra strømmen av enheter.



16

Hva slags inspeksjon er meningsfylt for partier fra stabil prosess?
Etter det som er sagt ovenfor finnes det bare to muligheter:
e ingen inspeksjon

e 100% inspeksjon

Hva som en er best tjent med vil avhenge av de kostnadselementer som

foreligger (kp-regelen).

Inspeksjon av partier fra ustabil prosess
Dersom det er grunn til å anta at vi har en ustabil prosess, bør vår forståelse
av ustabiliteten i prosessen bestemme om vi satser på
e ingen inspeksjon

e 100% inspeksjon
e delvis inspeksjon

Informasjonen ved eventuell inspeksjon bgr selvsagt umiddelbart utnyttes

i forbedringsarbeid med sikte pa å stabilisere prosessen.

Dette kan ofte

medføre at man samtidig finner muligheter permanent reduksjon av feilhyppigheten, som overflødiggjør videre inspeksjon.

Dersom vi i utgangspunktet ikke vet om prosessen er stabil eller ikke,

bør selvsagt dette bringes på det rene.

Diskusjon
Noen ganger svarer det seg å ikke foreta inspeksjon av partier i det hele
tatt, noen ganger svarer det seg å foreta inspeksjon av alle enhetene i

partiet (totalinspeksjon), mens det noen ganger er best å foreta bare en
stikkpøveinspeksjon.

Det fins omfattende teorier omkring ”optimale” stikkprøveplaner, som
omfatter utvalgsmetode, bestemmelse av stikkprøvestørrelse og aksepttall,

hvor en holder kostnader med å slippe gjennom enheter med feil eller av
dårlig kvalitet opp mot inspeksjonskostnadene.

Følgende uformelle betraktning angående stikkprøveomfang kan gjøres:
1. Utfør ingen inspeksjon dersom inngående kvalitet er stabil og god.



17

2. Utfør totalinspeksjon dersom inngående kvalitet er stabil men dårlig,
og kostnadene ved inspeksjon ikke er uakseptable.

3. Utfør delvis inspeksjon dersom inngående kvalitet vanligvis er god
og ingen inspeksjon synes påkrevet, mens det sporadisk forekommer
dårlige partier som berettiger totalinspeksjon.
Nå skal vi være forsiktige med å gi generelle anbefalinger, fordi omstendighetene
i den konkrete situasjon kan variere. Vi har situasjoner karakterisert ved at

enheter kan ødelegges ved inspeksjon, muligens eller sikkert (f.eks. fyrverkeri som testes ved avfyring). Vi har situasjoner der partier som ikke aksepteres ved vår kontroll returneres til leverandør uten synlig kostnad. Slikt
er imidlertid lite ønskelig, og leverandørens kostnader blir vel til syvende og
sist veltet over på kunden.

Begge disse situasjonene, blant mange andre,

innbærer en aktititet som ikke tilfører enhetene verdi. Inspeksjon av dette
slaget strider derfor mot idéene i moderne kvalitetsfilosofi.

Hensikten med en stikkprøve kan være å redusere hyppigheten av enheter
med feil eller dårlig kvalitet som føres videre i systemet. Dette kan tenkes å
oppnås på flere måter:
- funne feil i stikkprøven rettes og dårlig kvalitet lukes ut,

- stor hyppighet av feil/dårlig kvalitet i stikkprøven kan indikere nødvendighet
av ytterligere kontroll av resten av partiet.

- stikkprøver gir informasjon som kan brukes til å finne årsaker til feil/dårlig
kvalitet

- stikkprøver er en nødvendighet for å sikre at leverandør ikke forfaller
eller utnytter fravær av inspeksjon.

Her er det siste mer et spørsmål om å reagere på den prosess som genererer
enhetene, og til dette er løpende registreringer i et kontrolldiagram et mer

tjenlig hjelpemiddel. Stikkprøven har dermed ikke et aksept /forkast formål.
Mange hevder med styrke at delvis inspeksjon har lite for seg.
”En kan ikke inspisere kvalitet inn i et produkt”
I situasjoner der partier er sammensatt av enheter fra en stabil prosess, der

feil opptrer tilfeldig i de individuelle enheter, er det som tidligere nevnt teoretiske grunner for at delvis inspeksjon ikke har mye for seg, utover eventuelt
som et ris bak speilet som kan bidra til at prosessen fortsatt holder seg stabil.
Gir vi våre studenter tilstrekkelig statistisk innsikt, slik at de ikke gjør
bruk av og formidler videre i beste fall verdiløse metoder?



18

Her er en oppfølging av debatten fra USA, presentert i forrige nummer av TG, om valg av
spillstrategi. Artikkelen er sendt inn av Per Lea og ble først publisert i magasinet
CHANCE, volume 4, no.2, 1991 . Artikkelen gjengis her med tillatelse fra CHANCE.

What do ”Let's Make a Deal” and
”Ask Marilyn” have in common?
A probability problem.

Monty Hall's Probability
Puzzle
Eduardo Engel and Achilles Venetoulias
Introduction
The game played on the TV show
"Let's Make a Deal” (with Monty
Hall) gives rise to the following interesting puzzle. There are three
curtains, an announcer (Monty)
and a player. One of the curtains

contains a valuable prize and the

other two are empty; only Monty
knows where the prize is. Players
win the prize ifthey guess correctly which curtain contains the
prize. Initially the player selects a
curtain. Then, Monty opens an

empty curtain that the player did
not choose. Having eliminated that
curtain from contention, Monty offers the player the option to select
the remaining third curtain as a
final choice. Then, the player must

decide whether it is an advantage
to switch curtains or to insist on
the original guess. At this point,

we suggest. the reader take a
minute to ponder the problem and
decide whether switching increases the chances of winning.
The decision the player faces is
6

VOL. 4. NO. 2. 1991

a tricky problem in elementary
probability which has become a
popular puzzle known as "the
three curtains puzzle.” It first appears to most people, including

the authors of this article, that the
player should be indifferent to
which curtain is selected because
both of the unopened curtains
have the same probability of containing the prize. This position of
indifference apnealsto intnition in
an apparently compelling manner.
In Cecil Adams’ words (see his
"Straight Dope’’ column of
November 23, 1990):
If there are three curtains the
chances of picking the right one
are one in three. Knock one out of
contention and the chances of
either of the remaining curtains
being the right one are even —
one in two.

More careful examination of the
conditional probabilities reveals
that the indirference argument is
wrong. The plaver's first guess
contains the prize with probabilitv
1/3 whereas the other curtain con-

tains the prize with probability 2/3
(this fact is proved in the next section). Thus the player is not only
better off by switching to the third
curtain but, by doing so, doubles
the chances of winning the prize.
The three curtains problem appeared first in a Letter to the Editor
by Steve Selvin in The American

Statistician in 1975. Recently, the
problem received wide public attention after Marilvn vos Savant
posed, and correctly answered, the
puzzle in her "Ask Marilyn"
column of September 9, 1990. Two
more Ask Marilyn columns have
followed (December 2, 1990 and
February 17, 1991) in which
Ph.D.'s from across the country
claimed that Marilyn was wrong
and that the indifference position
was correct. The following excerpts are taken from those
columns:

I suggest that you obtain and
May
refer to a standard textbook in

probability before you try to

answer a question of this kind
again.

& 1991 Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.



19

If one curtain is shown to be a
loser, that information changes
the probability of either remaining choice to 1/2. As a professional mathematician, I’m very

concerned with the general lack
of mathematical skills. Please

help by confessing your error.

You are utterly incorrect about
the game-show question, and I
hope this controversy will call
some public attention to the
serious national crisis in mathematical education.

Prompted by a reader who
“stumbled upon” the "Ask

Table 1

Prize is
behind

chooses

openscurtain

' switches

Player

Player

1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3

1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2

20r3
3
2
3
10r3
1
2
1

from 1 to 2 or3
from 2 to 1
from 3 to 1
from 1 to.2
from 2 to 1 0r3
from 3 to 2
from 1 t0 3
from 2 to 3

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

curtain

Player

curtain

3

3

Monty Hall

1or2

from 3 to 1 or 2

wins

No

Marilyn” column while “‘perverse-

ly flipping” through the Parade
Magazine section of his Sunday
newspaper, Cecil Adams took the
wrong side in his first column on
this puzzle (see the quotation

above). Two columns followed: In
the first he corrected his mistake,
and in the second he dealt with
letters from readers incredulous of
seeing him abandon the position

selected. In particular, the probability of getting the prize with that
curtain is the same as before (1/3).

But now there are only two can-

didate curtains and one of them
contains the prize with probability
1/3. Therefore, the other curtain

contains the prize with probability
1 -1=2. Deciding never to switch

with Marilyn).

curtains is equivalent to not
having the option to switch; hence
the odds of winning by not switch-

curtains problem and outlines

ing are one in three.

of indifference (and join sides

This article discusses the three

some interesting variations. First,

we attempt to dispel any doubt

that if the player changes curtains
the player is twice as likely to win
the prize by staying with the

original choice. Then we relate the
problem to a version of the three
prisoners’ dilemma. Finally, we
discuss entertaining variants.

Solution
There are many arguments for
verifying that switching curtains

offers an advantage. Perhaps the

shortest, though not the most intuitive, argument is the following.

Initially all three curtains are

equally likely to contain the prize
and the player has a 1/3 chance to

get the prize on the first guess.

Suppose that the player decides to
stay with the first guess, after the
announcer opens another curtain.
Clearly, nothing changes about the
curtain the player has already

A less elegant, but perhaps more
convincing solution is to list all the
possible outcomes of the game
(this, in fact, is Selvin’s original
solution) [see Table 1]. Counting
all outcomes shows that the probability of winning is 6/9=2/3

when the player changes curtains.

The critical element behind the
solution of the puzzle is that
Monty knows both which curtain
contains the prize and which curtain the player has chosen before
he opens a curtain. He is deprived
of the opportunity to eliminate the

player’s guess even if that curtain
is empty. Therefore, Monty’s
choice does not contribute any-

thing to the probability that the
player’s curtain contains the prize.
On the other hand, the fact that,
having had the opportunity to do
so, Monty did not open the curtain
which the player did not choose
does increase the probability of
finding the prize behind that curtain. This observation provides a

Three Prisoners’ Dilemma
A more striking formulation of the
same problem is one version of the
well-known three prisoners’ dilemma. There are three prisoners and

one guard. One of the prisoners will
be executed, and only the guard
knows who that prisoner is. The night
before the execution the guard
brings food to the first prisoner. The

prisoner is anxious about the upcom-

ing execution and asks the guard
whether he is the unlucky inmate.
The guard replies that he is not allowed to tell the prisoner if it is he that
will be executed, but he informs the
prisoner that the third prisoner will be
set free. The prisoner is greatly

alarmed by this response because
he immediately infers that the probof his death has increased
ability
from 1/3 to 1/2.

In reality, however, the prisoner
should not be any more concerned
than he was before talking to the
guard. His hasty conclusion is false,
since he will still be executed with
probability 1/3. Instead, it is the

second prisoner that will be executed with higher probability. By
analogy to the game with the curtains, the probability that the second
prisoner will be executed is now

raised to 2/3. This is the beauty of

the apparent paradox.

CHANCE: NEW DIRECTIONS FOR STATISTICS AND COMPUTING

7



20

heuristic explanation for why the
curtain which the player did not
choose is more likely to contain
the prize.

Monty Hall himself is credited
by Selvin with providing the following solution to the puzzle his
show originated. Monty begins by
confessing that he is not ‘‘a student
of statistics problems,” and by
(wrongly) finding fault in Selvin's
original argument. He goes on to

add: “Oh, and incidentally, after
one curtain is seen to be empty,

the player’s chances are no longer
50/50 but remain what they were
in the first place, one out of three.
It just seems to the contestant that
one curtain having been eliminated,
the player stands a better chance.
Not so.” Selvin remarks that it
could not have been said better!

Monty’s Behavior
Several assumptions on Monty

Hall’s behavior underlie the
counterintuitive solution to the

this possibility:

1. If the player picked the right
curtain, Monty Hall is so impressed that he gives the
player a million dollars and
tells the player to go home.
otherwise he lets the player
reconsider. In this case

switching is a sure bet.
2. If the player picked the wrong
curtain, Monty is so angered
that he shoots the player and
the player dies, otherwise the
show drags on. In this case,
staying put is a sure bet.

These scenarios indicate that

watching the show many times

column. Suppose an attentive

player’s current choice) at ran-

and do not correspond to the

viewer of the show notes that
Monty (a) does not give the player

dom.

a chance to switch curtains on

every show, and (b) decides to
open a certain curtain twice as

choice: In both cases the chances
of winning are exactly the same.

remaining third of the games

Monty would accidentally open
the curtain with the prize and the
game would have to be played
again.

Another major assumption is
that there is nothing systematic in

Monty’s behavior which could

help the player decide whether to
switch curtains or not. If this as-

sumption is dropped, the optimal
strategy may change substantially.
The following two scenarios, due
to Timothy Chow from Princeton
University, eloquently illustrate
8

VOL. 4, NO. 2. 1991

that Monty wants to give the contestant a fair chance and decides
to behave in a simple way. On

gested by Cecil Adams’ second

gument would be correct indeed:

the game would be the same if the
player switched curtains as if she
did not. In both cases, the player
would win one third of the time
and lose one third of the time. The

player chooses curtain 7 (the game
begins); Monty discards curtain 3
and the player switches to curtain
5 (first round completed); Monty
discards curtain 1 and the player
moves to curtain 4 (second round
completed); Monty discards curtain 7 and the player refuses
Monty’s offer to switch curtains
(third round completed); Monty
opens the curtain with the prize
(the game ends). Suppose further

example, consider a situation sug-

often when the player initially
chooses the “right” curtain as does
not. A player who is aware of these
observations should remain indif-

The player’s chances of winning

could develop as follows. The

every round, he chooses to open
one of the available curtains (i.e.,
those that do not contain the prize

before deciding on an optimal
strategy may prove useful. As an

three curtains problem. One of
them is that Monty knows which
curtain contains the prize. If this
were not the case, and all the
remaining assumptions were the
same as before, the indifference ar-

tunity to switch to one of the
remaining curtains. Under these
conditions, a hypothetical game

ferent between switching curtains

and staying with the original

A Game with Many Rounds
Suppose that, motivated by all the
attention he has recently received
from ‘‘students of statistics
problems,” Monty Hall decides to

become innovative and change the

game as follows. There are 7 cur-

tains (numbered from1 to 7) only
one of which contains the prize,
and the game consists of three
rounds. At the beginning of every
round, Monty discards one of the
curtains by opening one from the
curtains that do not contain the
prize and that differ from the
player’s current choice. Then, he
gives the contestant the oppor-

In this game the decisions the
plaver must make are considerably
more complicated than in the
original game, because the number
of strategies at the player’s disposal is much larger. The player
must decide on every round
whether to switch curtains or not;
hence the player has access to at
least 2°=8 possible strategies. In

reality, there are many more additional choices to make. For example, once the player has
decided to switch, the player must
decide between moving to a cur-

tain that has not been chosen
before and moving to a curtain
chosen on one (or even two) of the

preceding rounds.

Which strategy should the contestant follow? Should the player
switch on every round or only on
the first round? Should the player

switch on the first and last rounds?
And when the player switches curtains, should the player prefer a
curtain that has not been visited
before or a curtain that has already

been chosen on a previous round
(assuming, of course, that such a

curtain is available)? Again, it is

probably worthwhile

for the



sac

=————

21

Unconditional vs. Conditional Probabilities
As a generalization intended to
recreate more faithfully the actual
conditions on "Let's Make a Deal,”

suppose that the three curtains conceal a fabulous first prize (say a new
car), a nice second prize (say a
refrigerator), and a worthless gag
third prize (say a goat). Suppose that
Monty, in an effort to entice you, the
player, to switch away from your
original door selection, will always
open the door revealing the
refrigerator if he can (i.e., if you have
not already chosen the refrigerator);
otherwise, he will reveal the goat (he
would never reveal the car’s loca-

reader to pause at this point and
try to guess what the player’s best
strategy might be.

In an informal way, the optimal
strategy can be derived from the
intuition we gave for the solution
to the original puzzle (a formal
derivation is given in the Engel
and Venetoulias paper in the Ad-

ditional Reading). When Monty

opens a curtain, he is prevented

from discarding the player’s current curtain and, therefore, is not
giving out any information on the
likelihood of finding the prize behind that curtain. By the same
token, Monty’s choice increases
the likelihood of finding the prize

behind one of the curtains he
could, but did not, choose. Thus,
on any given round. the curtains
that are most likely to contain the
prize are those that the player has
not visited so far. The probability
of finding the prize behind an
"unvisited” curtain grows after
each round, whereas the probability of finding the prize behind
one of the remaining curtains (i.e.,
the player’s current choice)

tion). If this is Monty's strategy and

you know. this, then conditional on
seeing the goat revealed, switching
doors will of course win the car with
probability 1 (Monty only does this if
you initially picked the refrigerator).
But conditional on seeing the
refrigerator revealed, switching
doors will win the car with probability
only 1/2.

Note however that an argument
similar to the one of Table 1 shows
that unconditionally, the strategy of
always switching doors still wins the
car 2/3 of the time, as in the original
problem.

tains do not depend on the strategy
that the player followed during the
earlier part of the game. The only
effect the previous rounds have is
to prevent Monty from discarding
certain curtains and this is taken
into account by all the move-to-a-

new-curtain-on-the-last-round
strategies. Choosing an unvisited
curtain on the last round gives the
contestant the largest probability
of winning the prize regardless of
what the player did on all the previous rounds. In other words, any
strategy that switches to an un-

visited curtain on the last round of
the game is optimal.
Clearly, the optimal strategy

depends neither on the actual
number of curtains nor on the

numher of rounds, as long as there
are enough curtains in the game.

The probability of winning the
prize in the general game with n
curtains and k rounds can be calculated easily from the simplest
among all optimal strategies. This
strategy switches curtains only on
the last round. With this strategy,
the player always moves to a cur-

tain not visited before, because the
first, and only, time the player
switches curtains is on the last
The game then becomes
round.
those
are
prize
the
likely to contain
to a game with one
.
equivalent
never
has
player
curtains that the
Monty discards k
where
round
the
ore,
Furtherm
visited before.
the player the
offers
and
becurtains
prize
the
finding
chances of
one of the
to
switch
to
curoption
d
unvisite
those
hind one of

remains unchanged. The last time
the player has the option to switch
curtains, the curtains that are more

remaining

n-k-1

curtains.

is

(n-1)/

Counting cases, just as in Table 1,
shows that the player’s probability
winning

of

[n(n - k- 1)]. For example, when
there are 7 curtains and 3 rounds,
the probability of winning is 2/7,

which is twice as large as the probability of winning when the player
stays with the initial choice
throughout the game.

Conclusion
The surprising conclusion of the
three curtains problem has made
it a favorite mathematical puzzle.
In fact, some prestigious business
schools (e.g., Harvard, Stanford,
etc.) use the puzzle to educate their
MBA students in decision making.
The problem serves as an example
of how intuition can be misleading
in making decisions under uncer-

tainty (for more on this and other
relevant entertaining problems,
see Tversky and Gilovich’s article,
as well as the one by Larkey et al.,
in the Additional Reading).
Additional Reading

Adams, C., "The Straight Dope,” syndicated column that appears in
several weekly magazines; November 23, 1990; December 5, 1990;
February 22, 1991.

Engel, E., and Venetoulias, A. (1989).
Let's make a deal!, Technical
Report TR 66, CCREMS, S!oan
School of Management, Boston:
MIT, September.

Larkey, P.D., Smith, R.A., Kadane, J.B.
(1989). "It's okay to believe in the
hot hand,” Chance, Fall, 22-30.

Selvin, S. (1975). A problem in probability, in "Letters to the Editor,”
The American Statistician, 29, 67
and 134.

Tversky, A., and Gilovich, T. (1989).
“The cold facts about the ‘hot hand’

in basketball,” Chance, Winter, 16—
21.

vos Savant, M., "Ask Marilyn,” syndicated column

that appears

in

several weekly magazines; Septem-

ber 9, 1990; December 2, 1990;
February 17, 1991.

CHANCE: NEW DIRECTIONS FOR STATISTICS AND COMPUTING

9



22

Erik Torgersen:

Comparison of Statistical Experiments
Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications
Cambridge University Press, 1991

Denne boken omhandler den matematiske teori for sammenligning av statistiske eksperimenter, slik den har utviklet seg fra de grunnleggende arbeider av David Blackwell, Charles
Stein og andre rundt 1950, via gjennombruddet med LeCam’s defisiensbegrep i 60-årene

og ikke minst gjennom forfatterens egen forskningsvirksomhet de siste 20-25 år. Jeg vil
starte min anmeldelse med en hjertelig gratulasjon til forfatteren ved utgivelsen av dette

omfattende verket.
Teorien for sammenligning av eksperimenter kom i kjølvannet av Abraham Wald’s
berømte arbeider om statistiske desisjons-funksjoner.

For lettere å kunne forklare hva

kjernen i teorien er, vil jeg derfor først gå gjennom noen av grunnbegrepene fra desisjonsteorien.

Et statistisk eksperiment beståri at et tilfeldig utfall X (som i praksis ofte er en vektor
av reelle tilfeldige variable) observeres, der sannsynlighetsfordelingen for X avhenger av
en ukjent parameter 0.

Problemstillingen i den statistiske desisjonsteorien går ut på at

det skal velges en beslutning d fra en på forhånd gitt mengde D av mulige beslutninger.

Graden av “korrekthet” for beslutning d antas å være spesifisert ved en såkalt tapsfunksjon
L(0,d), som angir beslutningstakerens “tap” ved å treffe beslutning d nar Ø er den virkelige
verdi av den ukjente parameter. Informasjonen i X skal nå benyttes i valg av beslutning

d.

Dette gjøres i form av en beslutningsregel, som for hver mulig realisasjon av X sier

hvilken beslutning d(X) som skal velges. Godheten av beslutningsregelen d(-) måles ved

risikofunksjonen

R(0, d(-)) = EgL(0, d(X))
som angir det forventede tap vi påføres ved å bruke regelen d(-) når Ø er verdien på den
ukjente parameter.

La nå & betegne eksperimentet som består i observere det tilfeldige utfall X, og la F
betegne et annet eksperiment som består i observere et tilfeldig utfall Y, der sannsynlighetsfordelingen for Y avhenger av den samme ukjente parameteren 0 som bestemmer fordelingen for X. Anta at vi bare kan observere ett av eksperimentene € og F. Hvilket av

dem gir mest informasjon om 6?
Den klassiske definisjon i teorien for sammenligning av eksperimenter sier at € er minst

like informativ som F hvis for ethvert beslutningsproblem (gitt ved en mengde D av mulige
beslutninger og en tapsfunksjon L(0,d)) og enhver beslutningsregel dø(-) basert på Y, det

fins en beslutningsregel de(-) basert på X som er minst like god som dr(-) i den forstand
at

R(9, de(-)) < R(8,dr(-)) for alle 6

(1)



23

Det viser seg imidlertid snart at ordningen minst like informativ mellom eksperimenter
bare unntaksvis vil være oppfylt dersom man prøver å sammenligne to eksperimenter. Det
var derfor et viktig gjennombrudd for feltet da Lucien LeCam rundt 1960 vendte seg til
det mer generelle problemet å kvantifisere informasjonstapet om å ved å basere seg på €
istedenfor på F. Han gjorde dette ved å innføre den såkalte defisiensen for
med hensyn
pa F, betegnet 6(€, F).

Definisjonen av defisiens springer naturlig ut fra (1), og går essensielt ut på at 6(E,7F)
defineres som det minste tall € > 0 som medfører at ulikheten (1) kan oppfylles for alle
6 og alle beslutningsproblemer, dersom € legges til på høyre side. Det forutsettes da at
|L(Ø, d)| < 1 for alle 0 og d, men merk at alle begrensende tapsfunksjoner L kan skaleres
slik at dette er tilfelle. Jo mindre € som skal til, jo mindre er informasjonstapet ved å
observere € istedenfor F. Hvis € er mer informativ enn Ff, er 6(€,F) =0.
Det interessante er at ekvivalente definisjoner av 6(€, F) kan uttrykkes alternativt ved
maksimum risiko, ved ytelsesfunksjoner for desisjonsregler, ved Bayes risikoer, eller ved
randomiseringer. Dette ble påvist av LeCam, og han generaliserte dermed tilsvarende
resultater for det klassiske “mer informativ”-begrepet. LeCam’s defisiensbegrep danner
kjernen i denne boken.

Første del av boken gir en introduksjon til statistiske eksperimenter og konveksitetsteori.

Deretter følger kapitler om spill-teori, desisjonsteori og vektor latticer. Det siste

emnet spiller en meget stor rolle for representasjon av statistiske eksperimenter. Det viser
seg nemlig at bruk av standard målteori ofte fører til unødvendige problemer av ren teknisk
natur, og at disse unngås ved å arbeide innenfor en funksjonal-analytisk ramme ved bruk

av teori for vektor latticer. Denne nye måte å representere eksperimenter på synes etter
hvert å få en viss utbredelse, og framstillingen i boken vil her være nyttig også utenfor
feltet sammenligning av eksperimenter.

Boken går så over til å studere defisiensbegrepet og dets sammenheng med andre begreper som suffisiens, randomisering, avstandsmål, ordninger, ekvivalensbegreper, kompletthet og konvergens. De tre siste kapitlene er viet til ulike anvendelser av teorien. Her
studeres bl.a. lineærnormale modeller og lokal sammenligning av eksperimenter. Det vises

også hvordan teorien for sammenligning av eksperimenter kan ses på som en generalisering
av teorien for majorisering og Schur-konveksitet. Mens mye av motivasjonen for LeCam’s

arbeider på feltet har vært knyttet til asymptotisk statistisk teori, er slike anvendelsene
imidlertid ikke spesielt berørt i denne boken.

Som det framgår av omtalen ovenfor, vil boken først og fremst rette seg mot teoretisk
orienterte statistikere, og eventuelt matematikere med interesse for statistikk. I tillegg til
at den gir en tilnærmet komplett framstilling av teorien for sammenligning av eksperi-

menter, utgjør den en meget verdifull kilde for alle som arbeider med matematisk teori for
statistiske eksperimenter og statistisk desisjonsteori. Det er gjennom hele boken lagt vekt
på motivasjon av begreper og resultater, noe som selvsagt er svært viktig i en såvidt abstrakt framstilling som dette. Nødvendige forkunnskaper for å kunne ha utbytte av boken
er et visst grunnlag i målteori og funksjonalanalyse.
Bo Lindqvist



24

Multivariate Calibration.
Harald Martens and Tormod Næss.
Wiley

Anmeldt av Erik Bølviken.
Kalibrering dreier seg om å estimere indirekte målte størrelser. Anta X er en eller flere
målinger av en ukjent størrelse Y. Boken handler om hvorledes en prediktor Y = f(X)
kan bestemmes empirisk fra treningsdata der samsvarende verdier av Y og X foreligger fra
et representativt utvalg. Problemet betraktes ut fra behovene i kjemi, med spesiell vekt
på spektroskopiske data. Det har (i følge forordet) vært en målsetting å bygge bro med
mellom praktisk kalibrering i kjemi /ingeniør-fag og statistisk teori. “A combination of the
chemist’s and statistician’s point of view is presented.” (side 34).
Forfatterne er utvilsomt godt kvalifisert til å skrive en slik bok. Dr. Tech. Harald Martens,
sivilingeniør fra Norges Tekniske Høgskole og Dr. Scient Tormod Næss, utdannet statistiker ved Universitetet i Oslo har begge lang erfaring i praktisk arbeid med kjemiske og
spektroskopiske data og har offentliggjort en rekke arbeider innen såkalt kjemometri. De
har derfor bakgrunn til å bedømme hvilke typer statistiske teknikker dette fagområdet har
nytte av, og deres vurderinger har krav på interesse, også blant statistikere alment. Deres
hovedemne (kalibrering) innebærer, som nevnt, at prediksjon er det sentrale poeng. Det
legges vekt på empirisk modell validering og på metodikk som tåler enkeltstående, sterkt
avvikende observasjoner (“outliers”). Derimot er hypotesetesting stort sett fraværende.
Det er ikke vanskelig å følge forfatterne i det. Jeg synes også de har atskillig å fare med
når de (side 33) hevder at

“Statisticians, on the other hand, have very good formal handle on
distributions and have valuable methods to assess uncertainties. But
since they usually do not have a personal relationship to the samples
and the instrumentation, they can become prisoners of the given data
or locked into some type of standard statstical model. Å danger in some
statistical traditions is to focus to much on an elaborate mathematical model
description of the problem instead of driving for goal-oriented results.”

Dette er en type advarsel “praktikere” fremmer fra tid til annen.
mening klar adresse til visse fagtradisjoner i statistikk.

Den har etter min

Boken er altså rettet mot praktisk, empirisk modellkonstruksjon, skrevet i den ånd sitatet
ovenfor tilsier og den har interesse og verdi utover sitt direkte anvendelsesområde. Det
tradisjonelle statistiske begrepsapparatet innføres, men uten strenge modellforutsetninger
(som normalfordelinger) og uten usikkerhetsevalueringer som bygger på disse. Fremstillin-

gen begrenser seg hovedsaklig til lineære og bilineære prediksjonsmetoder. Behandlingen
av lineære metoder er standard (og kan leses mange andre steder), selv om noe stoff er spesifikt knyttet til kalibrering (f.eks. diskusjonen om invers” kontra “klassisk” kalibrering).



25

Forfatternes hovedhensikt er imidlertid å introdusere bilineære teknikker. Selv om mye av
fremstillingen er algoritmisk (se nedenfor), gis det en motivering ut fra en latent variabel

modell. Det postuleres at det finnes (et lite) antall latente (ikke-observerbare) faktorer
Tr forbundet med både respons Y (som godt kan være vektoriell) og forklarTi, Taj...

ingsvariable X. Det antas lineære relasjoner av formen
k

i=1
k

¥
t=1

der P; og Qi; er såkalte loading-vektorer, like lange som X og Y henholdsvis, og E og F
tilfeldige avvik. Dette gir en prediksjonsmetode ved at T;,72,..., Tr kan bestemmes fra X

og deretter settes inn i ligningen for Y.

Modellen er en vanlig faktoranalysemodell med et klart slektskap til teknikker som prinsipal komponentanalyse og kanonisk korrelasjonsanalyse. Den kunne ha veert identifisert ved
en av teknikkene utviklet i faktoranalyse, men forfatterne bruker isteden den sakalte “par-

tial least squares” (PLS) algoritme, som estimerer loading-vektorene parvis, først (P;, Q1),
deretter (P2,Q2) osv. En av grunnene til denne fremgangsmåten er særegenheter ved spektroskopiske data, som ofte består av mange ekstremt høyt korrelerte målinger. Det er ikke
uvanlig i disse anvendelsene at antall variable er større enn antall enheter, og det trengs
teknikker som håndterer dette. Jeg må tro forfatterne mener PLS er velegnet.

Bokens viktigste bidrag er at den utvikler PLS-metodikken til en praktisk brukbar statistisk
teknologi, implementert i komersielt tilgjengelig programvare (UNSCRAMBLER). Den er
skrevet ut fra et markert fagsyn, som gjennomsyrer fremstilingen, men uten å gli over i
overivrig misjonering. Likevel er det knapt til å unngå at man har motforestillinger mot
noen av de mange prinsipielle synspunktene. Ett av dem er forholdet mellom *hard”
og "bløt” (="soft") modellering. Mens lineær regresjon henføres til de “harde” metoder
(“which in their very structure and pretension lock the mind into possibly inadequate explanations” , side 60), klassifiseres bilineære teknikker til de "bløte” (“pragmatic models
that leave the mental inference to the subsequent graphical inspection phase”, også side

60). Dette er overdrevet. Riktignok tilpasser bilineære metoder seg bedre til dataene (på
godt og ondt), men “hard” og “blgt” har antakelig like mye å gjøre med holdninger (hos
personer) som med egenskaper til lineære/bilineære metoder per se. Er forfatternes vurdering her påvirket av at lineær regresjon ofte har vært fremstilt i en drakt av gaussiske
antakelser?

Jeg er heller ikke overbevist om at det nødvendigvis er mest naturlig å betrakte prediksjon
ut fra en latent variabel modell. På den annen side leverer Martens og Næss et generelt
begrepsapparat med bred anvendelse, og deres PLS-fremstilling bør ha interesse for statistikere alment, ikke minst som innlegg i en metodisk debatt. Dessuten inneholder boken



26

avstikkere til en lang rekke moderne ideer som bootstrapping, ikke-parametrisk regresjon,
trestrukturmetoder osv. Den pedagogiske side er bra, skjønt gjør ikke alle de halv-filosofiske
betraktningene (verdifulle i seg selv) boken vanskeligere tilgjengelig enn den kunne ha vært
for folk med liten bakgrunn i statistisk metode (en av målgruppene)? Det virker ganske

barskt å gi seg i kast med den uten forkunnskaper, selv om den i prinsippet står på egne
ben (med et avsnitt om lineær algebra inkludert). Men kanskje jeg undervurderer våre
kjemometriske venner?

Referanselisten virker grundig og indeksregisteret er utmerket (jeg hadde mye nytte av
sistnevnte da jeg skrev denne anmeldelsen). Det gjenstår å gratulere Martens og Næss
med et vel gjennomført arbeid.

Jon H. Knudsen: INNFØRING I MINITAB. Universitetsforlaget, 1990.
ISBN 82-00-02648-5. 87 sider. Kr. 109,-.

Det

kan diskuteres

innføring

S.

H.

i

Searle advarer i

Packages:

om det

statistikk på

er vel

betenkt

programvare av

sin artikkel:

Some Words of Caution?"

å basere en

typen MINITAB.

"Statistical Computing

i nr.4 The American

Statistician 1989 mot å bruke datapakker i innføringskurs i
statistikk. "I think that learning what and when is initially
more important.
The how can be learnes when needed.
If
learned early on, at the expense of statistics itself, the
student can easily spend more time on computing than on

statistics,

and so be deficient

in some important

statistical

topics."

Boken til Jon H. Knudsen er, så vidt jeg vet, den første
norskspråklig innføring i statistikk som baserer seg på
MINITAB.

Framstillingen er gitt

i

en noe sleivete stil:

"Resultater av beskrivende mål kan danne input til

formulering

av statistiske hypoteser.
Beregning av konfidensintervaller,
testfunksjoner og deres p-verdier gjør det mulig å bekrefte
eller

avkrefte disse hypotesene."

(8.30)

"Vi kan ikke regne med samme presisjon i svaret fra en
simuleringsundersøkelse som i en teoretisk undersøkelse.
På
den annen side, et svar finner vi alltid, og det er da noe."
(8533)

På s.39 har vi en svært
tall

generatorer.

forenklet beskrivelse av tilfeldig-



27

På s.42 gir Jon H. Knudsen Gauss æren for først å ha
formulert minste kvadraters metode.
Det er mulig at Gauss
kjente til teknikken først, men det er i alle fall Legendre

som først publiserte metoden i 1805.
Se Stigler:
The History
of Statistics.
The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900.
Harvard University

Press

1986.

Hvis en oppfatter boken som en innføring i

en bli

noe bekymret over visse

formuleringer:

statistikk,

En estimator er "en ligning hvis løsning er et estimat"
Kommentar til

kan

(s.43)

antakelsen om uavhengighet:

"Om du synes at det er pedanteri å presentere en slik uttalt
forutsetning, kan jeg være enig i det, dersom du leser dette
kursorisk og overflatisk.
For de av leserne som vil se
statistisk teori i bruk, er det imidlertid nødvendig med et
noe høyere presisjonsnivå."

(8.69)

En interessant side ved boken er at

den viser hvordan

makroer i MINITAB kan brukes til å tilpasse de tilgjengelige
prosedyrene til en konkret problemstilling.
Et interessant
eksempel

er Ranoo Hvebergs W-metode

(s.

65

-

76).

Dette

er en

generalisering av tegn-testen og gir en fordelingsfri metode
til

å

sammenligne n datasett hver med like mange

observasjoner.
Dessverre har forfatteren glemt å gi
henvisning, slik at det kan gis inntrykk at selve metoden er
hans

ide’.

Som en oppsummering synes jeg ikke boka til Jon. H. Knudsen
gir noe overbevisende argument for at innføring i statistikk
bør gis i form kjøring av en datapakke.
Dette betyr ikke at
det ikke kan være behov for norskspråklig materiell om

MINITAB,

men jeg tror ikke at dette overflødiggjør en mer

teoretisk innføring i begrepsapparatet i sannsynlighetsregning

og

statistikk.

Henrik Dahl



28

14.NORDISKE KONFERANSE I MATEMATISK STATISTIKK

Norsk statistisk forening har den glede 4 invitere til den 14. nordiske konferanse i matematisk statistikk
som blir holdt på

Hotel Røros i Sør-Trøndelag
i tiden 15.-19. juni 1992

Røros er en gammel kobbergruveby med historie tilbake til 1644. Stedet har en spennende

trehusbebyggelse som er så enestående at den er plassert på samme liste over bevaringsverdige byggverk
som pyramidene i Egypt.

PROGRAM

Programmet er bygd opp etter samme retningslinjer som tidligere konferanser. Det består av fire inviterte
hovedforedrag med diskusjoner og 9 gruppeemner. Gruppeemnene er fordelt på tre sesjoner, se vedlagte

timeplan.

INVITERTE HOVEDFOREDRAG

Erik Bølviken og Dag Tjøstheim, Norge:

Non-linear Time Series, Regime Models and Related

Hermann Thörisson, Island:

Coupling Methods in Probability Theory

Lene Theil Skovgaard, Danmark:

Repeated Measurements Designs

ine Models in Statistics

Grace Wahba, Wisconsin, USA:

’ GRUPPESESJONER

1.

Principles of Statistical Inference

Organisator: Jan Bjørnstad, Norge (Trondheim)

2

Computational Statistics and Graphics

Organisator: Knut Conradsen, Danmark (Lyngby)

3.

Reliability

Organisator: Bengt Klefsjø, Sverige (Luleå)

4.

Biostatistics

Organisator: Odd Aalen, Norge (Oslo)

5.

Spatial Statistics

Organisator: Aila Sårkkå, Finland (Jyvaskyla)

6.

Teaching Statistics

7.

Statistics of Stochastic Processes

Organisator: Michael Sørensen, Danmark (Aarhus)

8.

Latent Models in Social Statistics

Organisator: Ib Thomsen, Norge (Oslo)

9.

Linear Models: Theory and Applications

Organisator: Sture Holm, Sverige(Gøteborg)

and Marked Point Processes

'

Organisator: Hans Stenlund, Sverige (Umeå)

Gruppesesjonene består av flere kortere bidrag, se forøvrig den vedlagte timeplanen som viser hvilke
gruppesesjoner som går parallelt. De deltakere som

|

ønsker å anmelde bidrag tar direkte kontakt med organisatorene, se vedlagte adresseliste.



29

ADKOMST

Til Røros kan en komme med bil, jernbane eller fly. Følgende reisemuligheter finnes fra Oslo med tog

og jembane for dem som ønsker å ankomme Røros mandag 15.juni:

Tog: Avgang(Oslo) kl 10.00
Fly: Avgang(Oslo) kl 12.40

Ankomst(R¢ros) kl 15.45
Ankomst(Røros) kl 13.25

For reisemuligheter fra andre stederi Norge henvises til rutetabeller for tog og fly.

For dem som ønsker å bruke bil kan vi opplyse at kjøretiden er omlag 5 timer fra Oslo og 2 timer fra
Trondheim.

For dem som skal reise fra Røros fredag 19.juni gjelder følgende tider:
Tog: Avgang(Røros) kl 12.06

Fly: Avgang(Røros) kl 13.40

Ankomst(Oslo) kl 17.46

Ankomst(Oslo) kl 15.20, via Trondheim

UTFLUKTER

Det vil bli arrangert omvisning i Røros og tur til en av gruvene, se vedlagte timeplan.
KOSTNADER

Konferanseavgiften er satt til Nkr 1100 og dekker konferansematcriell, utflukter og festmiddag.
For de som ikke ønsker å delta på festmiddagen er konferanseavgiften Nkr 850.

Konferanscavgiften betales til postgirokonto 0825 0411678 innen 15. mat på vedlagte postgiroblankett.
Hotellprisen er Nkr 850 pr person på enkeltrom pr døgn og Nkr 630 pr person på dobbeltrom pr døgn.
Ledsagende barn betaler Nkr 255 pr døgn.

Studentpris er Nkr 455 pr person i 4-sengsrom pr døgn.

Prisenc dekker frokost, lunsj og vanlig middag på hotellet. For de som deltar på festmiddagen er det et
fratrekk på Nkr 165 på pensjonsprisen en dag.

De som ønsker annen innkvartering må betale ordinære priser for måltidene.
Det er campingplass på Røros.
SVARBLANKETT

Svarblanketten retumeres innen 30. april til
Leiv Sotzeim

Seksjon for Metoder og Standarder
Statistisk sentralbyrå

Postboks 8131

N-0035 OSLO
NORGE .



30

ORGANISASJONSKOMITE

Leiv Solheim, Statistisk scntralbyrå, Oslo, leder,
Thore Egeland, Norsk Regnesentral, Oslo

Tormod Næs, MATFORSK, Ås

John Sølve Tyssedal, Norges Tekniske Høgskole, Trondheim

PROGRAMKOMITE
Jostein Lillestøl, Norges Handelshøyskole, Bergen, leder
Nils Lid Hjort, Universitetet i Oslo

Emil Spjøtvoll, Norges Tekniske Høgskole, Trondheim
Ib Thomsen, Statistisk sentralbyrå, Oslo

SPØRSMÅL
Spørsmål om konferansen kan rettes til:
Tormod Næs
MATFORSK
Osloveien 1

1420 ÅS NORGE

TIE 09 970165

Fax: 09 970333

SVARBLANKETT
Retumeres innen 30.april til

Lat Sotbein
Seksjon for Mecoder og Sundarder
Smistisk semralbyrå
Postboks 2131
H-0083 OSLO NORGE

Jeg sender en bindende påmelding til den 14. Nordiske Konferanse i Matematisk Statistikk på Røros
15.-19. juni 1992.

Fomavn:

Etternavn:
Adresse:

Sted:

Postnummer:

Fax:

Tlf:

Land:
Student(Ja/Nei):

Jeg ønsker å delta i gruppesesjonene nr:
Eventuelle ledsag

(marker barn spesielt)

Jeg ønsker
a) enkeltrom:

b) dobbelrom:

c) 4-scengsrom:

__kun for studenter
måltider på hotellet:

d) bo utenfor hotellet:
Ankomstti

Kt:

Transporumiddel(fly/tog):

Avreisetidspunkt:

————

Dere som kommer alene og bar kryssct av for dobbeltrom eller 4-scngsrom bes skrive opp
hvem dere eventuelt pnsker 4 dele rom med:

Jeg ønsker å delta på fesumiddagen(jamei):
—



31

Program/Timeplan

ADRESSELISTE FOR ORGANISATORENE AV GRUPPENE
Gruppe 1

Mandag 15. juni
11.00-16.30
13.00-15.00

Registrering
Lunsj

16.30-16.45

Åpning

Plenumsforelesning:

Gruppe 2

Knud Condradsen
Danmarks Tekniske Høyskole
IMSOR Bygn. 321
2800 Lyngby DANMARK

Gruppe 3

Bengt Klevsjø
Dept. of Mathematics
Luleå Universitet
95164 Luleå
SVERIGE

Gruppe 4

Odd Aalen

Erik Bølviken & Dag Tjøstheim, Norge

Non-linear Time Series, Regime Models and Related
Topics
Middag/kulturinnslag

Tirsdag 16. juni
07.00-09.00

Frokost

09.00-12.00
12.00-13.00

Plenumsforelesning:

13.00-15.00

forelesning:

15.00-15.30
15.30-17.30

Lunsj

Pl

Erik Bølviken & Dag Tjøstheim forts.

Hi

Gruppesjoner:
Gruppe 1.

Gruppe 9.
18.00-20.00

Byvandring i Røros

20.00-

Middag

Principles of Statistical Inference,
Organisator: Jan Bjørnstad, Norge
Spatial Statistics and Marked Point Processes,
Organisator: Aila Sårkkd, Finland
Linear Models: Theory and Applications,
Organisator: Sture Holm, Sverige

Onsdag 17. juni
Frokost

09.00-10.00

Plenumsforelesning:

10.00-10.15

Pause

P. Boks 1122 Blindern

0317 Oslo

Gruppe 5

Department of statistics

12.00-13.00

Lunsj
Gruppesesjoner:
Gruppe 3.

Hans Stenlund
Umeda Universitet
Inst. for mat./stat.
901 87 Umeå SVERIGE

Gruppe 7

Michael Sørensen

Gruppe 6.

Gruppe 8.

15.00-

Busstur til Olavsgruva

19.30

Middag

Latent Models in Social Statistics
Organisator. Ib Thomsen, Norge

Torsdag 18. juni
07.00-09.00

09.00-12.00
12.00-13.00

13.00-15.00

Frokost

Plenumsforelesning: Grace Wahba forts.
Lunsj

Plenumsforelesning:

Lene Theil Skovgaard, Danmark

Repeated Measurements Designs

15.00-15.30

Kaffe/mineralvann/frukt

15.30-17.30

Gruppesesjoner:

Gruppe 2:

Gruppe 4:

Gruppe 7:

19.00-

Computational Statistics and Graphics

Organisator: Knut Conradsen, Danmark
Biostatistics
Organisator: Odd Aalen, Norge

Statistics of Stochastic Processes
Organisator: Michael Sørensen, Danmark

Festmiddag

Fredag 19. juni
07.00-09.00

Frokost

09.00-10.30

Diskusjon:

10.30-10.45
11.00-

Avreise

Avslutning

Århus Universitet

Matematisk Institutt
Ny Munkegade

8000 Århus
Gruppe 8

Wahba's foredrag
Jon Helgeland, Norge
Diskutanter:
Den andre diskutanten er foreløpig ikke klar
.

DANMARK

Ib Thomsen
Statistisk sentralbyrå
P.B. 8131 Dep.

0033 Oslo

Organisator: Bengt Klefsjø, Sverige
Teaching Statistics
Organisator: Hans Stenlund, Sverige

FINLAND

Gruppe 6

Henrik Madsen, Danmark

Reliability

I

SF 40351 Jyvaskyla

Splinc Models in Statistics

Diskusjon: Bølviken & Tjøstheim's foredrag
Markku Rahiala, Finland
Diskutanter:

NORGE

Aila Sarkka
University of Jyvaskyla

PL35

Grace Wahba, USA

10.15-12.00

13.00-15.00

statistikk

Universitetet i Oslo
Seksjon for medisinsk statistikk

Thérisson, Island

Coupling Methods in Probability Theory
Kaffe/mineralvann/frukt

Gruppe 5.

07.00-09.00

ikk og

AVH

7500 Dragvoll NORGE

16.45-18.30

19.30-

Jan Bjørnstad
ivut
for
m:

Gruppe 9

NORGE

Sure Holm

Statistiska Inst.
Victoriagt. 13
41125 Gercborg SVERIGE



32

Industriell matematikk i 10 år ved NTH:
Jubileumskonferanse 17.-21. august 1992
Som annonsert i forrige nummer av TG, feirer studieretningen for industriell matematikk
på NTH sitt 10 års jubileum i år. I den anledning vil det bli arrangert en konferanse
om industriell matematikk i august. Denne konferansen omfatter også den 9. nordiske
konferanse om matematikk-undervisning ved tekniske universiteter, samt det 6. nordiske
møte om industriell og anvendt matematikk (den nordiske grenen av SIAM).
Selve konferansen pågår de tre første dagene, mens de to siste dagene er forbeholdt
minisymposier i 6 ulike emner.
Temaet for konferansen er industrielle anvendelser av matematikk, numerikk og statistikk, samt universitetsprogrammer i industriell matematikk. Det er 6 inviterte foredragsholdere, men påmeldte bidrag er velkomne.
Blant emnene for minisymposiene kan vi nevne "Statistical Methods in Image Processing” og *Reliability Theory”.

Brosjyre med detaljerte opplysninger og påmeldingsblankett kan fås ved henvendelse
til Bo Lindqvist, Institutt for matematiske fag, 7034 Trondheim, tlf.

boQimf.unit.no.

07-593532, email:



33

KALENDER FOR INTERNASJONALE MØTER
1992

1.-3. juni - Second Nordic Symposium on Statistical Software in
Education,Research and Practice, Helsinki, Finland.

Informasjon: NordSSS, Dept. of Statistics, University of Helsinki, Aleksanterinkatu ty

SF-00100 Helsinki, Finland. E-mail: nordsss Gnoppa.helsinki.fi
15.-19. juni - 21st Conference on Stochastic Processes and Their
Applications, North York (Toronto), Canada.

Informasjon: G.L. O'Brien, York University, Dept. of Mathematics, 4700 Keele Street,
North York, Ontario, Canada M3J IP3. E-mail: omega@yorkvm1.yorku.ca
14.-20. juni - Fifth International Symposium on Statistical Decision Theory
and Related Topics, West Lafayette, Indiana , USA.

Informasjon: Shanti S. Gupta, Dept. of Statistics,Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

47907, USA. E-mail: tej @cc.purdue.edu

22.-26. juni - The 5th International Meeting on Statistical Climatology
(5IMSC), Toronto, Canada.

Temaer: Klimaendringer og effekt av drivhusgasser. Informasjon: Francis W. Zwiers,
Numerical Modeling Division, Canadian Climate Centre, 4905 Dufferin St., Downsview,
Ontario, Canada M3H 5TH. E-mail: acrnrf7.@cid.aes.doe.ca

8.-11. juli - 3rd International Conference on Practical Bayesian Statistics,
Nottingham, England.

Informasjon: A. O'Hagan, Dept. of Mathematics, Univ. of Nottingham, University Park,
Nottingham NG7 2RD, England.

13.-17. juli - GLIM 92 and 7th International Workshop on Statistical
Modeling, Miinchen, Tyskland.

Informasjon: Ludwig Fahrmeir, Seminar fiir Statistik, University of Miinchen, Ludwigstr.
33, D-8000, Miinchen 22, Tyskland. E-mail: glm.stamo@statistik.uni-muenchen.dbp.de
9.-13. august - Joint Annual Meetings of ASA,IMS and the Biometric Society,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Informasjon: ASA, 1429 Duke Street, Alexandria , VA 22314-3402, USA.
17.-21. august - 13th International Meeting on Clinical Biostatistics,
København, Danmark.

Informasjon: Karsten Schmidt, Spadille Biostatistik ApS, P.O.Box 25, N.W. Gadesvej 4,
DK 3480 Fredensborg, Danmark.

24.-28. august - 10th Symposium on Computational Statistics (COMPSTAT),
Neuchatel,

Sveits.

Informasjon: COMPSTAT Secretariat, Groupe de Statistique, Universite de Neuchatel,
Pierre-a-Mazel 7,CH-2000 Neuchatel, Sveits. E-mail: sekoenig@cnedcu51.bitnet



34

9.-11. september - Royal Statistical Society Full Conference,
Sheffield,

England.

Informasjon: P.J. Diggle, Math. Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YF,
England. E-mail: maa026 @uk.ac.lancs.centl

14.-18. september - 20th European Meeting of Statisticians, Bath, England.
Informasjon: R. Sibson, School of Math.,Univ. of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, England.
E-mail: ems @maths.bath.ac.uk

24.-26. september - International Conference on Survey and Statistical
Computing, Bristol, England.

Informasjon: L. KcKay, 4 Mansel Drive, Rochester, Kent ME1 3HX, England.
30.nov.-3.desember - Meeting on Biostatistics, Newcastle, Australia.
Informasjon: A.J. Dobson, Dept. of Statistics, University of Newcastle, Newcastle,

NSW

2308, Australia .

7.-11. desember - The 16th International Biometrics Conference,
Hamilton, New Zealand.

Informasjon: IBC '92 Secretary, Ruakura Agricultural Centre, East Street, Hamilton, New
Zealand. E-mail: ibc @ruakura.maf. govt.nz.
1993

11.-14. januar -

Indo-US-Japan Conference on Quality Through Engineering

Design, Bangalore, India.

|

Informasjon: NIST, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA. E-mail: lund @micf.nist.gov.
21.-25. juni - 22nd Conference on Stochastic Processes and Their
Applications, Amsterdam, Nederland.

Informasjon: SPA '93,CWI, PO Box 4079, 1009 AB Amsterdam, Nederland.
E-mail: spa93 @cwi.nl

28.juni-3.juli - 6th International Vilnius Conference on Probability Theory
and Mathematical Statistics, Vilnius, Litauen.

Informasjon: V. Statulevicius, Inst. of Math. and Informatics, Lithuanian Academy of
Sciences, 4 Akademijos Street, 232 600 Vilnius, Litauen.
8.-12. august - Joint Annual Meetings of ASA,IMS and the Biometric
Society,San Francisco, California, USA.

Informasjon: ASA, 1429 Duke Street, Alexandria , VA 22314-3402, USA.
19.-24. august - 8th International Workshop on Statistical Modelling,
Perugia, Italia,

Informasjon: A. Forcina, Dept. of Statistical Science, Univ. di Perugia, CP 1315/1,
Perugia, Italia. E-mail: statfrc@ipguniv.bitnet

25.aug.-3.sept. - 49th Biennial Session of the International Statistical
Institute, Firenze, Italia.

Informasjon: ISI Permanent Office, 428 Prinses Beatrixlaan, PO Box 950, 2270 AZ
Voorburg, Nederland.



55

SCANDINAVIAN JOURNAL OF STATISTICS
SJS har nå skiftet forlag, idet Blackwell Publishers erstatter Almqvist & Wiksell fra og
med årgangen 1992. Som før er det imidlertid de nordiske statistiske foreningene som står
som utgivere, og skiftet får selvsagt heller ingen konsekvenser for den redaksjonelle linjen.
Abonnentene vil merke endringen ved at abonnementet nå skal betales enten ved
kreditt-kort til Blackwell Publishers, eller til SJS’ postgirokonto i Danmark. Både gamle
og nye abonnenter kan bruke skjemaet som finnes i dette nummer av TG.
Jeg vil minne om at medlemmer av Norsk Statistisk Forening får SJS for den utrolig
lave prisen 160 kroner for hele 1992.

Norske statistikere bør støtte opp om sitt “eget” tidsskrift SJS ved å
e Abonnere

& Sende inn gode arbeider (manuskripter sendes hovedredaktør Elja Arjas)

Bo Lindqvist

Subscription order form for members of the Norwegian
Statistical Society

Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, Volume 19, 1992
Please complete as appropriate and return the following form to: Anne Kitson,

Marketing Manager, Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF,UK
Name and address (to which the journal should be sent):

I have earlier subscribed to Scandinavian Journal of Statistics ODO;

I am a new sub-

scriber (J. (Please tick as appropriate.)

Members of the Norwegian Statistical Society can pay either direct via credit card to
Blackwell Publishers or in local currency via Danish post giro.
Option 1 — payment direct to the publisher.

Please enter my member subscription to volume 19, 1992 at £14.50 and charge my

Eurocard [: Mastercard (Access): Visa (Barclaycard): Diners Club/American
Express (1): (Please tick as appropriate.)

Card number
Signature

|

|

|

|

Expiry date

Option 2 — payment via Danish giro account of SJS board.

Please tick if appropriate: 1 I have paid 160 Norwegian kroner to Danish giro no.
6 52 10 10 (Address: Scand. J. Statist., Mat. sek., Thorvaldsensv. 40, DK 1871 Frederiksberg C)

Important notice: Members who pay via Danish Giro must send their
address details separately to Blackwell Publishers, typically by use of this
form. Missing issues, claims and other queries regarding receipt of the journal should be addressed directly to Blackwell Publishers.



36

NYTT FRA UNIVERSITETER OG HØYSKOLER.

NYTT FRA UNIVERSITETET I OSLO
Uteksaminerte cand. scient.
Birger Pedersen : "Metoder for optimalisering av vedlikeholdsstrategien til et produksjonssystem”

Veileder : Arne Bang Huseby

Erik Hæreid : “To additive modeller i kredibilitetsteorien”
Veileder : Bjørn Sundt

Arne Lars Bjørnaa Eyland : "Classification of Cars in a Multiplicative Rating Model
using Recursive Credibility Estimation — Theory and Application”
Veileder : Bjørn Sundt

Finn Tveito : "Estimering i en sensurert geometrisk fordeling”
Veileder : Erik Torgersen

Ansettelser
Petter Abrahamsen er NAVF-stipendiat fra 1. september 1991

Harald Haukås er stipendiat i samarbeid med Høgskolesentret i Rogaland fra 1. januar
1992

Jon Ketil Grønnesby er stipendiat fra 1. januar 1992

Eva Skovlund er ansatt som førsteamanuensis fra 1. januar 1992

Permisjon
Erik Torgersen har forskningsfri våren 1992 og vil i en del av perioden oppholde seg ved
University of California, Berkeley

Publikasjoner
Nils Lid Hjort : “On the time a diffusion process spends along a line”, Statistical Research Report No. 10, 1991

Svein Eggen, Bent Natvig & Jørund Gåsemyr : “Periodental conditions among two
Norwegian patient groups. Å statistical analysis of the relation of probing pocket depth to
sex, age, plaque, residence and torus mandibularis”, Statistical Research Report No. 1, 1992

Seminar
Avdeling C arrangerte et seminar på Granavolden Gjæstgiveri 20.-21. februar med følgende
4 seksjoner : "Vi utdanner”, "Vi forsker”, "Vi studerer” og "Mening og mål — evaluering
og tiltak”. Vi arbeidet delvis i plenum, delvis lærere og studenter hver for seg og delvis i
mindre grupper som varierte fra emne til emne. Program og referat vil bli samlet og utgitt



37

som Statistical Memoirs. Det var i alt 29 deltakere, 13 lærere og 16 hovedfagsstudenter.
Arrangementskomitéen besto av : Grete U. Fenstad, Nils Lid Hjort og André Teigland.

Jubileum
Erling Sverdrup fylte 75 år den 23. februar i år. Avdelingen markerte begivenheten ved
å invitere ham på lunsj i restaurant Proffen.

NYTT FRA GRUPPE FOR STATISTIKK, NTH
Ny professor
Henning Omre (Norsk Regnesentral) har tatt i mot det ledige professoratet (etter Arnljot
Høyland).

Ferdige sivilingeniører (studieåret 90/91)
Helge Blaker: ”Preference functions and Interference’. Veileder: Emil Spjøtvoll.
Mette Langaas: ‘Systems with Emphasis on Explanatory Variables’. Veileder: Jørn Vatn

/ Per Hokstad (ansv. fagl.).
Rita Mikalsen: "Bruk av statistiske metoder for å forbedre Gamma-kamera bilder’. Veileder: Fred Godtliebsen.

Ferdige sivilingeniører (studieåret 91/92)
Jo Aldal: ’Analysemetodar for statistiske forsøk i samband med raffingrkjgringar’. Vei-

leder: Liv Høyland.

Georg Elvebakk: ’Resampling teknikker for analyse av reparerbare systemer”. Veiledien:
Bo Lindqvist.

Turid Follestad: ’Multidimensjonal analyse av klangfarge for strykeinstrument’. Vei-

leder: Emil Spjøtvoll.

Kjetil Hansen: ”Software regularity analysis shuttle tanker oil and gas transport”. Thom
E. Thorstensen / Stein B. Jensen (ansv. fagl.).
Harald Haukaas: ’Optimale vedlikeholdsavtaler for brann- og gass- detektorer”. Veileder: Odd Thomassen / Stein B. Jensen (ansv. fagl.)
Leif G. Hestholm: ”Beredskapsanalyse for Embla-plattformen’. Veileder: Øystein Borg-

ersrud / Arnljot Høyland (ansv. fagl.).
Anita Kittelsen: ”Corrosion and Lifetime Models’.. Veileder: Marvin Rausand / Arnljot

Høyland (ansv. fagl.).
Kari Hege Mørk: ’Simulering av gassnettverk’. Veileder: Morten Sørum / Bo Lindqvist

-

(ansv. fagl.).
Espen Fyhn Nilsen: ”Analyse av utblåsingsrisiko på offshoreinstallasjoner”. Veileder: Jo

Hulbækdal / Stein B. Jensen (ansv. fagl.).



38

Hilde Oddaker:

’Graphical Estimation for Repairable Systems with Explanatory Vari-

ables’. Veileder: Bo Lindqvist.

Jorunn Seljelid:

’Statistical Methods for Repairable Systems Reliability, with Application to X-mas Tree Valves on Production Platforms’. Veileder: Jan Eirik Ramstad/Bo
Lindqvist.

Ivar Skjeldal:

’Reliability Asessment of Subsea Isolation Function’. Veileder: Jan Erik

Vinnem / Bo Lindqvist ( ansv. fagl.).
Geirmund Vislie: ”Oreda Trend Analysis’. Veiledere: Hans Jørgen Grundt og Jørn Vatn.

/ Stein B. Jensen (ansv. fagl.)

Publikasjoner
Kjell A. Doksum & Arnljot Høyland: Models for Variable-Stress Accelerated Life
Testing Experiments Based on Wiener Processes and the Inverse Gaussian Distribution.

Technometrics, 34, pp. 74-82.
Bo Lindqvist: Moment inequalities for the reliability function. Statistics & Probability

Letters, 13, pp. 85-88.



39

- Norsk Statistisk Forening - Adresseliste
Poststed:

Navn:

Adresse:

Aberge, Rolf
Aalen, Odd
Aamodt, Geir
Aarseth, Jan H.

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Seksjon for med. stat.

Aarset, Magne
Aarø, Ragnar
Aase, Knut K.
Aasnes, Jørgen
Aastorp, Ove
Aastveit, Are H.
Abelsen, Birgit
Abrahamsen, Petter
Aksland, Ma
Albrektsen, Grethe
Aldrin, Magne
Almøy, Trygve
lvheim, Atle
Amundsen, Arne

Matematisk institutt

DNV Industrial Devel

yskole
Norges Handrie

P.b. 8131 DEP.
P.b. 1122 Blindern
ei 86 B
Otto Ri

ent

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
NLH

Norsk Regnesentral
Inst. fiskeri og marinbiologi
Norsk Regnesentral

NSD
SOS.ØK. institutt
Sosialdepartementet
Amundsen, Ellen J.
Amundsen, Herdis T. SOS.ØK. institutt

Auestad, Bjørn H.

Aven, Terje
Bakke, Nils
Bartonoba, Alma
Baste, Valborg
Belsby Liv
Berge, Erling
Biørn, Erik
Bjelke, Erik
Bjerke, Frøydis
Bjerve, Steinar
Bjøntegård, Eivind
Bjørkestøl Kirsten
Bjørnstad, Jan Fr.
Blaker, Helge
Bodsberg, Lars
Borgan, Jens Kr.
Borgan, Ørnulf
Bredrup Edvin
Brenn, Tormod
Brox, Knut Håkon
Brun, Oddny H.
Bu, Tor
By, Vigdis
Byermoen, Irene

Byguglien, Jan

Christensen, Peter
Christoffersen, Knut
Dahl, Grete
Dahl, Henrik
Damsleth, Eivind
de Groot, Arold
Doksum, Kjell

Egede-Larsen, H.O.

Inst. for mat. og nat.HSR
Rogaland Distr.høyskole
Statistisk Sentralbyrå

NILU,

Statistisk sentralbyrå
SOS. ØK. inst.

Papirindustriens forskn.inst.
Mat. inst. avd. C

SOS.ØK. institutt

Inst. for Mat. og Statistikk
Statistisk Sentralb
MRC Biostatitics

Unit

Interpro AS
Norsk Hydro A/S

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Kredittkassen

Norsk Hydro
Department of Statistics

Norsk Regnesentral

Evandt, Øystein

VERITAS

Fagerheim, Jørn
Fagerthun, Hans E.
Fenstad, Anne M.
Fenstad, Grete
Flåm, Sjur Didrik
Folkeson Morten
Foosnæs, Hans
Forsen, Lisa
Fossen, Stein
Foss, Tron
Fredrikson Gunnar
Fridstrøm, Lasse
Fuglerud, Per H.
Funnemark, Espen
Furnes, Nils Terje
Gaarder, Simen
Gaasland, Ann K.
Gedde-Dahl, Truls
Georgsen, Frode
Gilde, Vibeke
Ciollectad

mva

Helleveien 30
P.b. 8131, DEP
H. Nestens veg 2 D

len berggt. 71 A
Øvre114MøBlindern
P.b.
Høyteknologisenteret
4
Hans T:
P.b. 114, Blindern
Østre Torp
Hans Holmboesgate 22
P.b. 1095, Blindern
P.b. 8011 DEP.
P.b. 1095, Blindern
P.b. 2557, Ullandshaug

P.b. 2450
P.b. 8131, DEP.
Box 64
Sydneskleiven 4
Postboks 8131
Søråsveien 28
P.b. 1095
Postboks 127
P.b. 115 Vindern
P.b. 1053, Blindern
P.b. 1095, Blindern
Voielia 26

Universitetet i Trondheim
Singsaker Studenterhjem

Ss

Egeland, Thore
Eide, Geir Egil
Eide, Henriette
Eie, Birgit
Engeland, Anders
Engen, Steinar
Esbensen, Kim

Espehaug, Birgitte

Universitetet i Bergen
P.b. 300 Høvik

, Avd. 75

P.b. 8131, DEP
5 Shaftesvury Roac
Ivar Aasens vei 10
Biskop Bergrravsgt. 30
ten 15

Kokstadvn. 9, P.b. 85
Boks 4313 Nygårdstangen
Harald Bothnersvei 40
8162 Sogn Studentby
P.b. 510, Stasjonssida
Hovsveien 21

Middelthuns gt. 17
Lutvannsveien 28
Vigvollåsen 51
P.b. 200

Vikolviks - rute/2980

Evans Hall, Univ. of Calif.
Nils Bays vei 27

4004 STAVANGER
4001 STAVANGER
0033 OSLO
2001 LILLESTRØM
5010 BERGEN
0033 DEP. OSLO

1430 ÅS

0317 OSLO
5043 HOP
0319 OSLO
0316 OSLO
0317 OSLO
4623 KRISTIANSAND
7055 DRAGEVOLL
7010 TRONDHEIM
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
0033 OSLO
Cambridge ENGLAND
9000 TROMSØ
9000 TROMSØ
0655 OSLO
5061 KOKSTAD

5028 BERGEN
7017 TRONDHEIM
0858 OSLO

2201 KONGSVINGER

1800 ASKIM
0368 OSLO
0676 OSLO
4600 KRISTIANSAND
1341 STABEKK

4900 TVEDESTRAD
Berkely, CA 94720 USA

0401 OSLO
0340 OSLO
0384 OSLO

AVH

Mat. inst. Avd. C
Inst. for økonomi
Storebrans-Norden
Nord-Trøndelag DH
Statens inst.for folkehelse

0314 OSLO
1440 DRØBAK
5007 BERGEN
0317 OSLO
0030 OSLO
0317 OSLO

Bjørnst. Bjørnsons på. 1
Flyveien 13

Inst. for mat. og stat.

Norsk Regnesentral

1432 ÅS - NLH.

7043 TRONDHEIM
0314 OSLO
5006 BERGEN
5008 BERGEN

ÖSLO
0876
0314 OSLO

NHH
P.b. 4220 Torshov

NRK, Statistikkontoret

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
5035 BERGEN
0033 OSLO
2050 JESSHEIM

P.b. 114 Blindern

Statitisk avd. Nycomed A/S

Inst. for Mat. og stat.

0033 OSLO
0317 OSLO
1345 ØSTERAAS
5007 BERGEN
1322 HØVIK

P.b. 114

G. Tischendorfsvei 49
P.b. 300

Veitvetstubben 8C
Trondheimsvn. 35B
Prof. Dahisgate 5
P.b. 1053, Blindern
J. Reinsgt. 19
Haakon VII'sg. 10

5035 BERGEN - S

7055 DRAGVOLL
0314 OSLO

5031 LAKSEVÅG
1322 HØVIK
0596 OSLO
2040 KLØFTA
0355 OSLO
0316 OSLO
5008 BERGEN

0161 OSLO

Geitmyrsveien 75
Lyngveien 44
Blakersund

Jegerveien 12F

Statistisk avd. Nycomed A/S
Veritec

Avd.for foreb.inf.med, Siff.

Bernt Knudsens v 44B
P.b. 4220 Torshov
P.b. 300, Høvik

Trostefaret 2B
Ullernfaret 14E

0281 OSLO

Enebakkveien 25C

0402 OSLO
0657 OSLO
0373 OSLO

Åslandsveien13
.75
Geitm

Ivar Aasebs vei 37
Gaoildulenat

11

9105 EIDKJOSEN

NES2

NEAr OM



40

K.
gj Håkon

Inst. for matematiske fag
Inst. for matematiske fag
Inst. for stat. og datebeh.
STATOIL
Elkem Forsknin;
Mat. inst. avd.

ter

SOS.ØK. institutt

Statistisk avd. Nycomed A/S
Kreftregisteret

Valesvei 22

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Norsk Regnesentral

Hjellvik, Vidar
Hjort, Nils Lid
Hoffmann, Eivind
Hokstad, Per
Holen, Marit Olsbø
Hollund, Knut U.

Holme, Ingar
Holter, Jon Petter
Homleid, Mariken
Horten, Harald
Hove, Sverre
Hoveid, Øivind
Huseby, Arne Bang
Hustoft, Anne Gro
Hveberg, Ranoo
Høst, Gudmund
Høgåsen, Guttorm
Høyland, Arnljot
Høyland, Liv
Høyland, Tor E.
Indregaard, Magnar
Indrehus, Oddny
Indseth, Audun

Irgens Å

Iversen, einvor

Jensen, Einar

Inst. for matem. fag
Univ. i Bergen

Norsk Regnesentral
SINTEF, Avd.75
Medsstat institutt
Norges Bank
Meterologisk inst.

NILF

Mat. inst. Avd. C
SI
MR-DH

Norsk Regnesentral
Mat.inst. Avd. C
Inst. for matematiske fag
Inst for matematiske fag
Fors.selsk.stat.kontor

Statens Veivesen
Norsk Hydro

Avd. for klinisk kjemi
Norsk Regnesentral

Kjersgaard, Pal
Kleive, Ann Marit
Knag, Klaus
Knudsen, Jon H.
Kristiansen, Arild

Kristiansen,Mai-Lis
Kristoffersen, D.T.

Laake, Petter
Langssa, Mette

Statistisk Sentralbyrå

Sosialøkonomisk inst.

Lanpiat Arve

Akvtuar 5, Gjensidige

Lauvskar, Ole
Lea, Per
Lettenstrøm, Gerd
Lie, Rolv Terje .
Lie, Stein Atle
Liestøl, Knut

VITAL Forsikring
Matforsk.

Lillestøl, Jostein

Norges Handelshøyskole
Inst.for matematiske fag

Lauritzen, kåre
Larsen,

Sti

Elin
Lilland, Inger
Lilleng, Solfrid

beacon
Lusd, Nils H.
Ljøgot,

Lydersen, Stian
Lysne, Dan A.

Løvkvist, Håkon
Låstad, Knut Ivar
Martens, Harald

Martens, Magni
Meen, Knut
Melhus. Marita

Aramuer Hansens hus
Inst. for informatikk

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
SINTEF

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH

P.b. 1070, Blindern
Tårnfjellveien 19 P.b. —
Fagerlia

P.b. 1053Vipbygdd

40, Va
Pea,

P.b. 1095, Blindern
Telemark distr.høyskole
P.b. 4220 TORSHOV
Montebello

Maria Dehlis vei 27 A
Stensgata 35C
Kringsjåveien 18

0316 OSLO

3900 PORSGRUNN
4001 STAVANGER
3000 DRAMMEN
4602. KRISTIANSAND
0316 OSLO
0317 OSLO
3800 BØ I TELEMARK
0401 OSLO
0310 OSLO
1084 OSLO
0358 OSLO

7000 TRONDHEIM
9000 TROMSØ

P.b. 8131, DEP
P.b. 114, Blindern
gate 9
Ths. Heftys

0033 OSLO
0314 OSLO
0264 OSLO

Matematisk institutt
Adolph Bergs vei 13 A
P.b. 114, Blindern

5007 BERGEN

114, Ch. des MollisS

Kalfarv. 54
Bråtenalleen 25
P.b. 6, Ullev. sykehus
P.b. 1179 Sentrum
P.b. 45, Blindern

dan 68

P.b. 8024, DEP.
P.b. 1053, Blindern
P.b. 124, Blindern
P.b. 308
BOKS 114 Blindern
P.b. 1053, Blindern

6A
Kalfarlien
P.b. 8131, DEP.
P.b. 8131, DEP
Veidir. P.b.6390
P.b. 4313
Regionsykehuset i Trh.
P.b. 114, Blindern
NUTEC P.b. 6
Sletten
P.b. 8131, DEP
Ullevålsvn. 7
Prahlsvei 4
Myrarinden 8
Lyshovden 318
Hallagerbakken 18B
Høvik Terasse 4
Leverbakken 1
P.b. 1095, Blindern
Frode Rinnansvei 11
P.b. 397 Sentrum
Guldhaugsletta 7
Bjørnestadbakken 7
Post 530
Osloveien 1

Ar 2

erd14

P.b. 1080, Blindern
Skjenlia 45
Haugen, Bjørkmyr
Helleveien 30
Rudveien 18

P.b. 510, Stasjonssida
Avd. sikkerhet og pal.
Iskogen 366
M

Minister Ditleffsvei 11C
Salhusveien 150
Gamleveien 13
Gamleveien 13
Hanøytangen

5030 LANDÅS
0314 OSLO

CH-1293 Bellevue-Ge

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
5018 BERGEN
0487 OSLO
0407 OSLO
0107 OSLO
0313 OSLO
7043 TRONDHEIM
0673 OSLO
0034 OSLO
0316 OSLO
0314 OSLO
6401 MOLDE
0314 OSLO
0316 OSLO

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH

1352 KOLSÅS

8c
en 5B

are
ard

1432 ÅS-NLH

0202 OSLO

P.b. 2429, Solli
Høgåsveien 32

Innl
Hon:
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Statistisk Sentralbyrå

5030 LANDÅS

Konvalvei 14

Takobslivn. 55, Leil. 2

6800 FØRDE
1375 HØN
5018 BERGEN
0030 OSLO
0033 OSLO
0604 OSLO
5028 BERGEN
7006 TRONDHEIM
0314 OSLO

5034 YTRE LAKSEVÅG

5065 BLOMSTERDALEN
0033 OSLO

0175 OSLO

5035 BERGEN - S
5084 TERTNES
5033 FYLLINGSDALEN
1256 OSLO
3010 DRAMMEN
1346 GJETTUM
0317 OSLO
7035 TRONDHEIM
0103 OSLO
2013 SKJETTEN
0672 OSLO
5020 BERGEN

1430 ÅS

0363 OSLO
5021 BERGEN
5050 NESTTUN
0316 OSLO
5079 OLSVIK
7036 TRONDHEIM
5035 BERGEN-S
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
2000 LILLESTRØM
2201 KONGSVINGER

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
5095 ULSETH
0862 OSLO
5086 SALHUS

1430 ÅS
1430 ÅS

5310 HAUGLANDSH.
7058 TAKOBSLI



41

Rikstrygdeverket

Sjøkrigsskolen
BI-Skedsmo
Oslo Data

Dalsveien 37 B
Drammensveien 60

Frode Rinnansvei 183

Wallemsviken

Smedstuveien 32
P.b. 6664
Søndre Rød 13B

Akebakkeskogen 58A

Department of Statistics

Hans Øverlandsvei 51A

University of Chicago

Hedmark Distr.høyskole

FDB-Sentralen
Mat. inst Avd. C
Mat. Inst.

Univ.
i
Bergen

t. lab.

Forsknin

Inst. for inf.vit.sk.

Osloveien 1

Matforsk.

Norsk Regnesentral
1224 Sogn studentby
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
MMI A/S
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Palmstrøm, Henrik
Paulsen, Jostein E.
Petersen, Stein Ø.
Pham, Dinh Quang
Pripp, Petter
Rausand, Marvin
Reiersøl, Olav
ReiertsenN, Jon
Riise, Trond
Rodtwitt, Svein-E.
Rue, Håvard
Redevand, Sissel
Sagsveen, Anne
Salen, Anne-Berit
Samuelsen, Svein O.
Samset, Ooddgeir
Sander, Hildur
Sandstad, Berit
Sandvik, Leiv
Sandvik, Valborg
Sande, Ivar
Schalm, Arnfinn
Schweder, Tore
Seim, Eva
Selmer, Randi
Sevaldson, Per
Sigstad, Jenny-Anne
Simpson, Liv H.
Siring, Erling
Skancke, Gisle
Skaug, Hans
Skiri, Halvard

Skjold, Frode

Skjerven, Rolv
Skovlund, Eva
Skreppa, Tore
Solheim, Leiv
Sollie, Bj

Spjøtvoll, Emil

Standal, Nils A.
Stene, Jon
Stensholt, B.K.
StordalL, Kjell
Storvik, Geir
Sture, Sten
Stålhane, Tor
Sundt, Bjørn
Sverdrup, Erling

Swensen, Anders R.
Sæbø, Hans Viggo
Sørheim, Samuel
Sørlie, Ketil
Sørum. Morten

Matematisk inst.
NIS
Statistisk Sentralbyrå

SIMA

/ Tariff H10-5A
Aktuar
i,
SIFF
Avd. for epidemiolog
Avd. for kostholdsforskn.
Norsk Hydro A/S
Inst. for stat. og databeh.
Inst. for mat. og stat.

Statistisk Sentralbyrå

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Statoil, Resgeo-Rd
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Med. Inf. stat.

Inst. for informatikk
Norsk inst.for skogforskn.
Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Inst for matematiske fag
Statistisk inst.

Tekn. div., Oslo Teledistr.

esentral

Uni Storebrand

Wyatt - Lillevold

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
NIBR
VERITEC

Sognsveien 85
P.b. 8131, DEP
P.b. 9143 Vaterland
P.b. 8131, DEP
Ladegårdsgate 70
Hafrsfjordsgate 2
Univ. i Bergen
Strinsveien 2
P.b. 8131
Konsul Børsgt. 35

Torødveien 109

Armauer Hansens hus

Kay 708,

Damplassen 10
Olaf Bulls vei 11 A
Bøkveien 70
P.b. 114, Blindern
Simon Darres vei 65

Avd. sikkerhet og pal

SINTEF

Norsk

Liljeveien 13
P.b. 67
P.b. 1053, Blindern
P.b. 1053, Blindern
Selvikveien 20
Matematisk institutt
Ø. Nattlandsfjellet 10
Universitetsparken 5
Thor Møhlensgt. 55
Linneaveien 3

Åsterudsletta 86

Haukeland sykehus
Ullern Alle 121

Lofthus TerasseE 17A
Storebr.Norden, Pb.1380

Eidsvågveien 36
Geitmyrrsvn. 75
Torsvei 11B
Dr. Dedichens vei 48
P.b 1117, BLINDERN
Landskronavn. 44
Fredsborgvn. 32
P.b. 4313 Nygårdstangen

Stein

nget 63

P.b. 1070, Blindern
AVH
Holmensletta 10
P.b. 8131, DEP
Lillebergveien 12A
P.b. 8131, DEP
Boks 300
P.b. 8131, DEP
Hallskaret 76

Jakobslivn. 55, Leil. 2
MFH-b
dern
P.b. 1

P.b. 8131 DEP.
Våghalsen 6
Rådyrveien 89
estrædet 6
Myrdalskogen 147
P.b. 451, Sentrum
P.b. 114, Blindern
Boks 1155, Sentrum
Theodor Petersensvei 18
P.o.box 7118 H
te 4
Olav K
P.b. 8131 DEP.
Beverveien 2
Fana gymnas
P.b. 44 Blindern
Boks 300

0387 OSLO
0270 OSLO
7035 TRONDHEIM

5034 YTRE LAKSEVÅG

2013 SKJETTEN
7040 TRONDHEIM
057? OSLO
0752 OSLO
0490 OSLO
1322 HØVIK
5734 University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637, USA

2450

A

1450 NESODDTANGEN

1432 ÅS-NLH

0316 OSLO
0316 OSLO
5083 ØVRE ERVIK

5007 BERGEN

5030 LANDÅS

DK-2100 København Ø
5008 BERGEN
1450 NESODDTANGEN

1430 ÅS

0852 OSLO
0765 OSLO
7058 JAKOBSLI
0314 OSLO
0669 OSLO
0858 OSLO
0033 OSLO
0134 OSLO
0033 OSLO
5035 BERGEN - S
0273 OSLO 2
5007 BERGEN
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
0033 OSLO
5006 BERGEN

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
3135 TORØD
1344 HASLUM
5021 BERGEN
0381 OSLO
7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
0588 OSLO
0114 OSLO - VIKA

5082 EIDSVÅGNESET
0462 OSLO
7032 TRONDHEIM
0675 OSLO
0317 OSLO
2013 SKJETTEN
0177 OSLO

5028 BERGEN
1156 OSLO
0316 OSLO 3
7055 DRAGVOLL
0385 OSLO
0033 OSLO

7017 TRONDHEIM

0033 OSLO
4001 STAVANGER
0033 OSLO
5095 ULSET

2201 KONGSVINGER
7058 JAKOBSLI
5021 BERGEN
0316 OSLO

1432 ÅS-NLH

0033 OSLO
0458 OSLO

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
3900 PORSGRUNN
DK-1455 KØBENHAVN K
5095 ULSET
0104 OSLO
0314 OSLO
0107 OSLO
7000 TRONDHEIM
0351 OSLO
0273 OSLO
0033 OSLO
0596 OSLO
5040 PARADIS
0313 OSLO
1322 HØVIK



42

Statistisk Sentralbyrå
Norsk Regnesentral
Univ. i Bergen
Mat. inst. Avd. C

gdeverket
Inst. for mat. fag.
Kreftregisteret
NYCOMED

Inst.for matematiske fag
Sogn og Fjordane DH,

Vivås, Helga J.
Volden, Rolf

Vollset, E Stein
Walløe, Lars
Walsøe, Heidi
Wenstøp, Fred
Westad, Frank

Winther, Paal
Winter, Rune
Wolf, Ronald
Ytterstad, Elinor
Ødegaard, Lars A.
Østebø, Runar
Øvstedal, Tove

Norsk Regnesentral
Inst. for informatikk

Drammensveien 60

7016 TRONDHEIM
1374 BORGEN
0033 OSLO
0314 OSLO
5007 BERGEN
0316 OSLO
0270 OSLO

Postboks 4220 Torshov

0310 OSLO
0401 OSLO

Bergsbakken 11
Borgenveien 134 —
P.b. 8131 DEP
P.b. 114 Blindern
Matematisk institutt
P.b. 1053, Blindern
P.b 35
Ullern Chaussee 70

P.b. 39
P.b. 115 Vindern
Mauritz Hansens gt. 8
Nevberggate 16
Stokkanhaugen 56
P.b. 114, Blindern
Søre Renen 67
P.b. 1080, Blindern
Tverrbakken 3

Bedr. øk. inst

TECNICA A/S
Norsk Hydro A/S

P.b. 138 Dusavik
P.b. 24

1432 ÅS-NLH

7034 TRONDHEIM-NTH
5801 SOGNDAL
0319 OSLO
7030 TRONDHEIM
0367 OSLO
7048 TROMDHEIM
0314 OSLO
5044 NATLAND
0316 OSLO
0475 OSLO
1301 SANDVIK
0657 OSLO
5008 BERGEN
1251 OSLO
0963 OSLO
9000 TROMSØ
7035 TRONDHEIM
4001 STAVANGER
5049 SANDSLI



43

ANNONSE

UTLYSINGSTEKST
AMANUENSIS I STATISTIKK

Ved Agder distriktshøgskole er det ledig ei amanuensisstilling i
statistikk frå 01.08.92. Stillinga er knytt til Institutt for matematiske
fag.

Det er utarbeid ein stillingsomtale som ein vil få tilsendt ved å
venda seg til høgskolen.

Stillinga er plassert i Statens lønnsregulativ Lpl. 17.510, kode 1010,
lr.30, ltr. 15-21. Frå lønna går lovfesta innskot til Statens pensjonskasse.

Det kan søkjast om personleg opprykk til førsteamanuensis, ltr. 22.
Dersom slikt opprykk ikkje blir innvilga, er det høve til å trekkje
søknaden tilbake. Etter søknad kan tidlegare praksis bli godskriven.
Ved elles like kvalifikasjonar vil ein kvinneleg søkjar bli føretrekt.
Det krevst at den tilsette står til disposisjon for høgskolen og
studentane i ei tid som samla utgjer ei normal arbeidsveke.

Den tilsette har rettar og plikter som er fastsett i instruks for slike
stillingar.

Søknaden må innehalda fullstendige opplysningar om utdanning,
praksis og eventuell anna fagleg verksemd og sendast inn med
stadfesta kopiar av attestar og vitnemål i 4 eksemplar. Vitskaplege
arbeid som søkjaren vil skal takast med i vurderinga og liste over
desse, skal sendast inn i 3 eksemplar.

Søknadsfrist 27.03.92. Søknadsfristen gjeld også for innsending av
vitskapelege arbeid.

Søknaden skal sendast til Agder åistriktshøgskole, Fordenskjoldsgi
65, 4604 Kristiansand.

Nærmare opplysningar kan ein få ved å venda seg til instuttleiar
Leiv Storesletten, tlf. 042-79567 eller amanuensis Henrik Dahl, tlf.
042-79568.



44

Medlemskap i Norsk Statistisk Forening
Kontingenten i foreningen er på kr. 90 pr. år for regulære medlemmer og kr. 30 for studenter. Korrespondanse om medlemskap og innbetaling av kontingent skal skje til foreningens
kasserer:

Norsk Statistisk Forening v/Ole Lauvskar
Vital Forsikring
5020 Bergen

Innbetalinger skal gjøres på foreningens postgirokonto 5 15 10 55. Medlemmer som er usikre
på når de betalte kontingent sist, vil nederst til høyre på adresseseddelen for Tilfeldig Gang
finne angitt hvilket år siste betaling er registrert for. Vær imidlertid oppmerksom på at
adressesedlene for bladet ligger noe etter ajourføringen av medlemsregisteret, slik at nylig
foretatte innbetalinger ikke vil være tatt med her.

Nye medlemmer melder seg til kassereren under adressen oppgitt ovenfor. Slike medlem-

mer får automatisk tilsendt Tilfeldig Gang, med forbehold om at det tar noe tid før tilføyelser

og forandringer i medlemsregisteret gjenspeiler seg i adressesedlene til bladet. Adressefor-

andringer meldes også til kassereren. Ved utsendelsen av Tilfeldig Gang benyttes det kopier
av det vanlige medlemsregisteret, så adresseforandringer behøver ikke meldes separat til

bladet.

Annen korrespondanse med foreningen skal foregå med formannen under denne adressen:
Norsk Statistisk Forening v/Trygve Nilsen
Matematisk institutt
Universitetet i Bergen
Allégt. 55
5007 Bergen

Bidrag til Tilfeldig Gang.

Neste nummer av Tilfeldig Gang vil forhåpentligvis komme ut i juni 1992. Alle slags
bidrag til bladet er velkommen, enten det gjelder nye temaer av interesse for norske statistikere, eller man har kommentarer til innlegg som allerede har stått i bladet. Stoff til
neste nummer må være redaktøren i hende senest 1. juni. Det kan gjerne sendes som
ASCII-filer, eventuelt tilpasset IATpX, på diskett eller med elektronisk post. Redaktørens
adresse er:

Tilfeldig Gang v/Jan Bjørnstad
Institutt for matematikk og statistikk
Universitetet i Trondheim
Den allmenvitenskapelige høgskolen
7055 Dragvoll
Telefonnummer (07) 591751.

Elektronisk post: Jan.Bjoernstad@avh.unit.no
For IATpX-dokumenter: Inger.SeehuusQavh.unit.no





Returadresse:

Tilfeldig Gang v/ Ole Lauvs
Vital Forsikring A.S
5020 Bergen



